BIS Working Papers
No 1241

Estimating nonlinear
heterogeneous agent
models with neural
networks
by Hanno Kase, Leonardo Melosi, Matthias Rottner

Monetary and Economic Department
January 2025

JEL classification: C11, C45, D31, E32, E52.
Keywords: Neural networks, heterogeneous agents,
nonlinearity, aggregate uncertainty, HANK, zero lower
bound.

BIS Working Papers are written by members of the Monetary and Economic
Department of the Bank for International Settlements, and from time to time by other
economists, and are published by the Bank. The papers are on subjects of topical
interest and are technical in character. The views expressed in them are those of their
authors and not necessarily the views of the BIS.

This publication is available on the BIS website (www.bis.org).

©

Bank for International Settlements 2025 All rights reserved. Brief excerpts may be
reproduced or translated provided the source is stated.

ISSN 1020-0959 (print)
ISSN 1682-7678 (online)

Estimating Nonlinear Heterogeneous Agent Models
with Neural Networks ∗
Hanno Kase

Leonardo Melosi

Matthias Rottner

European Central Bank

University of Warwick,

BIS,

DNB, EUI, CEPR

Deutsche Bundesbank

January 13, 2025
Abstract
We leverage recent advancements in machine learning to develop an integrated
method to solve globally and estimate models featuring agent heterogeneity,
nonlinear constraints, and aggregate uncertainty. Using simulated data, we
show that the proposed method accurately estimates the parameters of a
nonlinear Heterogeneous Agent New Keynesian (HANK) model with a zero
lower bound (ZLB) constraint. We further apply our method to estimate
this HANK model using U.S. data. In the estimated model, the interaction
between the ZLB constraint and idiosyncratic income risks emerges as a key
source of aggregate output volatility.
Keywords: Neural networks, likelihood, global solution, heterogeneous
agents, nonlinearity, aggregate uncertainty, HANK, zero lower bound.
JEL classification: C11, C45, D31, E32, E52.

∗

We thank Borağan Aruoba, Jesús Fernández-Villaverde, Ed Herbst, David Levine, Christian
Matthes, Galo Nuño, Giorgio Primiceri, and Frank Schorfheide for their very helpful suggestions.
We also thank seminar participants at the 2023 NBER Summer Institute, 2024 Stanford Institute
for Theoretical Economics (SITE) Conference – Frontiers of Macroeconomic Research, the Banque
de France, Deutsche Bundesbank, Bank of Finland, University of Copenhagen, Schumpeter-BSESeminar in Berlin, University of Liverpool, CEBRA 2022 Annual Meeting, Conference on advanced
analytics by the ECB, BoE and KCL, EUI, Conference on Non-traditional Data, Machine Learning and NLP in Macroeconomics at Sveriges Riksbank, Ghent University Workshop on Empirical
Macroeconomics, 29th Symposium of the SNDE, SEM Conference 2022, EEA Conference 2022,
Midwest Macro 2022, T2M 2023, CEF 2023, and Lancaster-ETM 2024 Workshop on Empirical
and Theoretical Macroeconomics. We thank Jesús Laso Pazos for his excellent work as research
assistant. Hanno Kase gratefully acknowledges the financial support of the US Army under award
number W911NF2010242. The views in this paper are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as reflecting the views of the Bank for International Settlements (BIS), De Nederlandsche
Bank, the Deutsche Bundesbank, the European Central Bank, or the Eurosystem.

1

Introduction

Over the past three decades, a significant advancement in macroeconomic research
has been the integration of heterogeneity into dynamic general equilibrium models.
These models enable the study of distributional issues, economic fluctuations, and
stabilization policies within a single micro-founded framework. The complexity of
these models often necessitates introducing tractability assumptions that largely preclude scholars from considering nonlinear aggregate dynamics and their interactions
with heterogeneity. Yet, accounting for these nonlinear dynamics is essential to understand recent macroeconomic events, including recurring and prolonged periods at
the zero lower bound (ZLB), deep recessions, and the recent rise in inflation. In this
paper, we leverage recent advances in machine learning to develop a neural network
(NN)-based method for solving and estimating models with heterogeneous agents,
fully incorporating nonlinear aggregate dynamics. We apply our method to perform
likelihood estimation of a nonlinear Heterogeneous Agent New Keynesian (HANK)
model using US data.
Estimating structural models entails searching for parameter values that globally
maximize an objective function, which could be a likelihood function, a posterior
distribution, or the distance between a set of empirical moments or impulse response
functions and their model counterparts. This search involves evaluating the objective
function at potentially numerous parameter values. For each parameter value, two
steps are typically taken. First, the model’s policy functions are characterized (solution step). Second, once the policy functions are properly approximated for that
parameter value, the objective function is evaluated (evaluation step).
When estimating the parameters of an economic model, these two steps are repeated multiple times to find the global maximum of the objective function. This
repetition is not problematic if the model can be solved within a fraction of a second,
using a routine that can be easily automated. For instance, this is the case of linearized representative-agent models. However, repeatedly solving a highly complex
1

nonlinear model, such as nonlinear HANK models with aggregate uncertainty, is unmanageable. Additionally, in the context of HANK models, the solution step may
involve computing the steady-state equilibrium afresh, which is a quite computationally intense task to perform.
To overcome these computational hurdles, we approximate the model’s policy
functions without conditioning on specific parameter values. By treating the parameters as inputs, or pseudo-state variables, of the policy functions, we only need to
solve the model once, and only before launching the estimation. While this approach
expands the dimensionality of the model’s policy functions to approximate, NNs are
highly effective in managing high-dimensional problems (scalability), such that the
increase in computational burden remains manageable.1 Once the model’s policy
functions are approximated over the parameter space, the model’s solution can be
retrieved in a fraction of a second for any combination of parameters.
An additional computational challenge arises when performing likelihood estimation of nonlinear models. Evaluating the likelihood of these models requires the use
of filters based on Monte Carlo (MC) methods, such as the particle filter. These
filters are computationally more expensive and less accurate compared to those used
for evaluating the likelihood of linearized Dynamic Stochastic General Equilibrium
(DSGE) models. Therefore, minimizing the frequency of likelihood evaluations and
improving the accuracy of filter-based assessments are critical objectives.
To achieve these objectives, we train another NN –the neural network particle filter
– to obtain an approximation of the likelihood prior to estimation. This additional
NN is trained through three steps. First, we obtain several thousand quasi-random
parameter draws (training sample). Second, we evaluate the likelihood at each of
these draws using a standard particle filter. To perform this step we do not need to
solve the model multiple times as we can utilize the NNs trained to provide a fast
1

NNs are the fundamental building blocks of deep learning, which is a subset of machine learning methods. They provide a flexible functional form that can efficiently approximate arbitrarily
complex, nonlinear functions, potentially with a large set of inputs.

2

and reliable approximation of the model solution at each draw of the training sample.
Third, the NN is trained to predict the likelihood evaluated at these draws.2 The
NN particle filter delivers an accurate and smooth approximation of the likelihood
function by effectively ironing out the inaccuracies of the particle filter. With the
approximated likelihood function at hand, there is no need to repeatedly run a timeconsuming MC filter to maximize this function. Instead, the function can be evaluated
almost instantaneously at any parameter value using the NN approximation.
Importantly, our methodology facilitates the estimation of parameters influencing
the model’s steady-state equilibrium. By treating model parameters as pseudo-state
variables, the steady-state equilibrium needs to be solved only once with a specifically
trained NN. This feature alleviates a significant bottleneck, as solving the steady state
of these models at each solution step is computationally intensive. Furthermore, this
property of our method presents a crucial advantage, as it enables the estimation of
a greater number of parameters, expanding the scope of the estimation analysis.
We provide three proofs of concept to validate our methodology. First, we show
that our approach replicates the policy functions of a small-scale, linearized Representative Agent New Keynesian (RANK) model, which can be solved analytically.
Second, we compare our method for likelihood estimation to an alternative stateof-the-art method for nonlinear models. Since this alternative method cannot treat
parameters as pseudo state variables, its scope of application is considerably limited.
In light of these limitations, we are compelled to consider a stylized representativeagent model featuring only one source of aggregate nonlinearity – the ZLB constraint.
We show that the two methods deliver remarkably similar estimation outputs, suggesting that our method can perform equally well as a state-of-the-art global method,
but with the advantage of being applicable to a much broader set of models. Third,
we simulate a nonlinear HANK model and use the simulated data to estimate its parameters, including those affecting the steady-state equilibrium outcomes. We show
2

We minimize the mean squared errors between the likelihood vlaues approximated by the NN
and the likelihood values computed via the standard particle filter in the second step.

3

that our method successfully recovers the true parameter values of the model.
We then estimate a HANK model using US data. This model integrates both
idiosyncratic and aggregate shocks, along with nonlinearities such as individual borrowing limits and a ZLB constraint. Despite its stylized nature, the estimated model
matches a set of key moments of the data fairly closely. Idiosyncratic income risk is
found to explain a large share of volatility in the macro data. This finding is primarily
due to the presence of the ZLB constraint. As idiosyncratic risk rises, agents save
more and the interest rate falls, increasing the risk of encountering the ZLB. The
heightened ZLB risk leads to a higher volatility in inflation and output, as the central
bank’s capacity to stabilize the economy is diminished by the binding constraint.
Literature. Since Krusell and Smith (1998) wrote their seminal paper, the literature has introduced a variety of methods to solve models with heterogeneous agents
(e.g. Algan et al., 2008; Reiter, 2009; Den Haan et al., 2010 Ahn et al., 2018; Boppart et al., 2018; Bayer et al., 2019; Auclert et al., 2021; and Winberry, 2021). These
methods rely on linear approximations of the aggregate dynamics of the model and
are therefore not suitable for studying the interactions between nonlinearities and
heterogeneity in general equilibrium. Recently, the literature has applied these linearized techniques to estimate HANK models using likelihood methods (e.g. Challe
et al., 2017; Bayer et al., 2024a; Auclert et al., 2020; Lee, 2020; Auclert et al., 2021;
Bilbiie et al., 2023; and Acharya et al., 2023). Unlike in our paper, estimation is very
often confined to parameters that do not affect the model’s steady state and aggregate nonlinearities (e.g. the ZLB constraint) are not taken into account. Bhandari
et al. (2023) and Bayer et al. (2024b) pioneered methods to solve heterogeneous agent
models by approximating their aggregate dynamics to higher orders. In this paper,
we introduce NN-based methods to solve these models using global methods. Our
method also allows structural estimation of models with heterogeneous agents.
Our paper is connected to the literature that develops NNs to solve complex

4

dynamic macroeconomic models globally such as Fernández-Villaverde et al. (2020),
Ebrahimi Kahou et al. (2021), Maliar et al. (2021), Azinovic et al. (2022), Duarte
et al. (2024), and Valaitis and Villa (2024). Our contribution to this literature is to
show how to use NNs to not only solve but also to estimate nonlinear heterogeneous
agent models. Estimation – including the simulated method of moments, impulseresponse-functions matching, maximum likelihood, and Bayesian estimation – adds
an additional important layer of complication in that it requires solving the model at
hundreds of thousands of different points in the parameter space.
Fernández-Villaverde et al. (2023a) estimate the critical parameter of a model
with a financial sector and heterogeneous households with NNs using the time-series
of GDP growth. We can expand the scale of the estimation exercise and estimate
several parameters using multiple observable variables because (i) we combine the
scalability of NNs with the intuition of treating the model parameters as pseudo-state
variables when solving the model and (ii) we use NNs to facilitate the evaluation of the
likelihood via the filter - which we call NN particle filter. Furthermore, differently from
Fernández-Villaverde et al. (2023a), we estimate a HANK model. To our knowledge,
we are the first to estimate a HANK model in its nonlinear specification.
HANK models are attracting growing attention of scholars (e.g. Oh and Reis,
2012; McKay and Reis, 2016; McKay et al., 2016; Den Haan et al., 2017; Guerrieri
and Lorenzoni, 2017; Ravn and Sterk, 2017; Kaplan and Violante, 2018; Kaplan et al.,
2018; Auclert, 2019; Bilbiie, 2020 and Ravn and Sterk, 2020; Gornemann et al., 2021;
Luetticke, 2021; and Auclert et al., 2023).3 Methods to solve these models globally
by relying on NNs have been recently developed (e.g. Maliar and Maliar, 2020;
Gorodnichenko et al., 2021; Fernández-Villaverde et al., 2023b; and Han et al., 2021)
or by introducing alternative approaches unrelated to machine learning (e.g. Schaab,
2020; and Lin and Peruffo, 2024). Compared to this strand of literature, we show how
to leverage the scalability of NNs to enable estimation of nonlinear HANK models.
3

Scholars have also explored general equilibrium models where heterogeneity characterizes the
firm side – e.g. Ottonello and Winberry (2020).

5

The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we explain the architecture of our
NN-based methodology to solve and estimate nonlinear heterogeneous agent models.
In Section 3, we provide three proofs of concept of our method. We solve and estimate
a nonlinear HANK model using US data in Section 4. In Section 5, we conclude.

2

A neural-network framework for estimation

In this section, we describe how to leverage the properties of NNs to enable the
estimation of nonlinear models with heterogeneous agents. We first provide a primer
on NNs. Second, we explain how NNs can be used to efficiently characterize the
policy functions of a model treating the parameters as pseudo-state variables. Third,
we show how another NN can be trained to characterize the deterministic steadystate equilibrium of the model, when this equilibrium influences its policy functions.
Fourth, we explain how to train the NN particle filter.

2.1

Neural networks

NNs are function approximators well-suited for learning highly dimensional nonlinear
functions.4 Consider a function Y = ψ(X), mapping a vector of inputs X into a
vector of outputs Y. The function can be approximated by a NN denoted by:
Y = ψN N (X|W ),

(1)

where W are the weights defining the NN. As illustrated in Figure 1, the NN consists of several layers, which can be divided into the input layer, hidden layer(s) in
between, and the output layer. Each hidden layer consists of several neurons, which
are represented as circles in the figure.
4

NNs are the fundamental building blocks of deep learning – a class of machine learning techniques. The universal approximation theorem states that a feedforward network with at least one
hidden layer can approximate any continuous function in a finite-dimensional space with any desired
non-zero error given a sufficient width (Hornik et al., 1989.).

6

Hidden Layer

Hidden Layer
Output Layer

Input Layer

Figure 1: Illustration of a neural network. An illustrative example of a NN with three inputs
(blue circles), two hidden layers (the two rows of red circles) with six neurons (the red
circles) each, and four outputs (the green circles).

A single neuron is a composition of an affine function with inputs x1 , x2 , . . . xM ,
weights w1 , w2 , . . . , wM , and bias w0 and a nonlinear activation function g(·) that
returns a single output ỹ:5
ỹ = g(w0 +

M
X

wi xi ).

(2)

i=1

The structure and weights characterize a NN. For example, the NN illustrated in
Figure 1 has four layers containing in total 94 weights (including biases).6 In matrix
notation, we can write a single layer h of the NN as:

y = g Ah (x) , where Ah (x) ≡ W h x,

(3)

where the inputs, outputs, and weights are now written as vectors.7 As implied
by equation (3) and Figure 1, NNs are natural to vectorize, making them efficient
5

The nonlinear activation function g(·) makes it possible for the NN to approximate nonlinear
functions. Popular examples of activation functions are ReLU (rectified linear unit), CELU (continuously differentiable exponential linear units), or Tanh (hyperbolic tangent).
6
The first hidden layer has (3 + 1) × 6 = 24 weights (including biases); the second hidden layer
has (6 + 1) × 6 = 42; the output layer has (6 + 1) × 4 = 28. The first term in the brackets is the
weights plus the bias at each neuron, and the second term is the number of neurons in the layer.
7
The entire NN with H hidden layers can be written as a composition of functions ψN N (X|W ) =
H+1
A
◦ g ◦ AH ◦ g ◦ AH−1 ◦ · · · ◦ g ◦ A1 (X) where ◦ denotes a function composition.

7

to compute, especially on graphics processing units (GPUs) that excel at matrix
multiplications and element-wise operations.8
The weights W are optimized (trained) to minimize a loss function; e.g. the mean
squared error between observed and predicted values of the function to approximate.
The optimization of the weights of the NNs relies on the back-propagation algorithm,
which allows computing all partial derivatives of the loss with respect to the weights of
the NN in approximately the same number of operations, and similar computational
cost, as computing the loss itself. The partial derivatives inform the direction in which
an optimization algorithm should adjust the weights of the NN to minimize the loss.
In particular, we use a stochastic gradient descent based optimization algorithm called
AdamW, which is currently one of the most widely used optimizers for training NNs.
The accuracy of the NN approximation and the speed of the training process can be
improved by adjusting the learning rate during the training, which is done using a
learning rate scheduler. A common choice is to gradually decrease the learning rate
as the training progresses, following, for example, a linear or exponential schedule.

2.2

Neural-network solution method

We consider a large class of dynamic general equilibrium models, whose dynamics are
governed by the following transition equations or laws of motion:
St = f (St−1 , νt | Θ),

(4)

where St is a finite vector of S state variables of the model. The economy is subject
to U exogenous shocks νt that affect the response of the state variables. The model’s
structural parameters are denoted by Θ. The function f (·) is possibly nonlinear and
typically does not have a closed-form analytical characterization.
Solving the model amounts to finding a set of O policy functions that map the
state variables, St to a set of control variables, ψt for given values of the model
8

To further improve efficiency, the calculations are typically done for batches of inputs.

8

parameters, Θ: ψt = ψ(St |Θ). These policy functions satisfy a set of K equilibrium
conditions derived from the model equations:9
F (ψ(St |Θ)) = 0.

(5)

With the policy functions ψ(·) at hand, the transition equations (4) can be obtained.
Extended policy functions. A critical bottleneck for estimation is the need to
solve policy functions for a potentially very large and a-priori unknown number of
times at different parameter values. In the context of the models studied in this paper,
this task is often unmanageable. To address this issue, we treat the parameters to
estimate as pseudo-state variables when approximating the policy functions.10
We define the extended policy functions as


ψt = ψ St , Θ̃|Θ̄ ,

(6)

where the vector of parameters Θ is split into Θ̃ – the set of parameters to estimate
– and Θ̄ – the set of parameters that are fixed in estimation. The characterization of
the extended policy functions leads to the extended transition equations:


St = f St−1 , νt , Θ̃|Θ̄ .

(7)

Agents’ heterogeneity. In the literature studying heterogeneous agent models,
it is commonly assumed that there exists a continuum of agents. However, this
assumption makes the state vector infinite dimensional, which of course presents
insurmountable computational challenges. Therefore, when approximating the policy
functions of these models, we discretize the model population by keeping track of a
finite number L of agents.11
9

Examples of these conditions may be the Euler equation or the resource constraint.
Examples of computational papers that use pseudo-state variables in combination with machine
learning are Norets (2012), Scheidegger and Bilionis (2019), and Duarte and Fonseca (2024).
11
Our methods can be applied to solve models featuring a finite number of industries or countries.
10

9

The transition equations of heterogeneous agent models can be recast in exactly
the same form as in equation (4), where the state vector St comprises both the set
of aggregate state variables, SA
t , and the set of individual state variables for each
L

agent, {Sit }i=1 , and the vector of shocks, νt , includes both aggregate shocks, νtA , and
L

idiosyncratic shock for each agent, {νti }i=1 .
In contrast to the previous case with no heterogeneity, we now have two sets of
policy functions to approximate: the aggregate policy functions, denoted as ψ A (·),
and the individual policy function, represented by ψ I (·).12 Following the approach
introduced earlier, these functions are expressed in their extended form by treating
the parameters to estimate, Θ̃, as pseudo-state variables.
ψtA = ψ A (St , Θ̃|Θ̄) and ψti = ψ I (Sit , St , Θ̃, |Θ̄),

(8)

where Sit denotes the individual state variables. The number of individual and aggregate state variables are S i and StA , respectively, so the total number of state variables
is S = S i × L + S A . The number of exogenous shocks and policy functions is similarly
defined as U = U i × L + U A and O = Oi × L + OA , respectively.13
A
I
Neural networks and training. We set up two NNs, ψN
N (·) and ψN N (·), to

approximate the individual and aggregate extended policy functions, ψ I (·) and ψ A (·),
defined in equation (8). We train these two NNs by choosing their weights, W , so as
to minimize the weighted squared residual error for the equilibrium conditions:
L

Φ =

K
X

αk [Fk (ψN N (St , Θ̃|Θ̄))]2 ,

(9)

k=1
12

Note that the individual function is the same across agents, indicating that agents with the same
individual state variables Sit make the exactly same decisions, ψti .
13
In this paper, we track all the states of the agents as in Maliar et al. (2021) for instance. An
alternative approach is to reduce the dimension of the individual states to track by exploiting the
symmetry of the agents following Ebrahimi Kahou et al. (2021). Our method can be combined with
either approach.

10

where Fk (·) denotes the residual error associated with the k-th equilibrium condition
and αk is the weight of this condition.14 We include at least as many optimality
conditions as the number of policy functions, so that K ≥ Oi × L + OA .
To leverage the potential for parallelization provided by GPUs, the two NNs are
trained on a batch with size B. This step amounts to having B pseudo-randomly
drawn state vectors, St,b and parameters to estimate, Θ̃b . In each optimization step,
we minimize the loss functions ΦL averaged across batch size B:
B
K
i2
1 XX h
Φ̄ =
αk Fk (ψN N (St,b , Θ̃b |Θ̄)) .
B b=1 k=1
L

(10)

This loss function is minimized by using a stochastic gradient descent method.
As standard, to evaluate the residual error for some of the equilibrium conditions,
Fk (ψ(·)), we are required to compute agents’ expectations. We do so by using Monte
Carlo (MC) integration. Specifically, we randomly draw next period’s shocks to approximate expectations.15 To increase precision, one can conduct several optimization
rounds with new sets of drawn shocks to evaluate expectations.
The training of the NNs to approximate the aggregate and idiosyncratic policy
functions concludes the solution of the model. Since the parameters to be estimated
are treated as pseudo-state variables of the approximated policy functions, the model
can be simulated and its transition equations obtained in just a fraction of a second,
as these tasks only require evaluating the previously trained NNs. This approach
eliminates the need to repeatedly solve the model, which is a critical bottleneck when
estimating models with a large set of state variables.
Stochastic solution domain and truncated parameter space. The grid points
for the state variables and parameter values at the beginning of each optimization step
are drawn randomly. We aim to train the algorithm only on the relevant domain of the
14

The weights can vary so as to take into account that losses across different equations possibly
have different magnitudes.
15
To reduce the variance of MC integration, we use the antithetic variate method in this paper.

11

state space. Following the approach of Maliar et al. (2021), we directly sample from
the model to approximate the ergodic distribution of the state variables, also known
as the stochastic solution domain. Specifically, we simulate each economy (batch)
forward using the NNs trained at the current optimization step. The endpoint of
the simulation provides an approximation of the ergodic distribution of the state
variables, which we use for the next optimization step.
We truncate the space from which we draw the model parameters to estimate
(the pseudo-state variables). By limiting the admissible set of parameter values, we
achieve a more accurate evaluation of the ergodic distribution of the state at each
optimization step. In the case of Bayesian estimation, truncating the parameter space
when approximating the model’s solution can be made consistent through the use of
truncated prior distributions.
Parameters affecting the deterministic steady state (DSS). Often, solving a
heterogeneous agent model requires knowing its DSS.16 Finding the DSS necessitates
solving a Bewley-Huggett-Aiyagari type economy over the parameter space, which
is a computationally intensive step. To address this, we train an auxiliary neural
network (NN) to approximate the DSS. This auxiliary NN is then used when training
I
A
the other two NNs (ψN
N and ψN N ) that approximate the aggregate and idiosyncratic

policy functions defined in equation (8).

2.3

The neural network particle filter

The likelihood function of DSGE models is typically evaluated in two steps. In the
solution step, the model’s policy functions must be characterized. The neural networks
(NNs), trained as described in the previous section, can be utilized to perform this
task quickly and at several points in the model’s parameter space. With the policy
16

The DSS is typically defined as the model economy in the absence of aggregate shocks (e.g.,
Fernández-Villaverde et al., 2023b). For example, in the context of New Keynesian models, the
monetary policy rule is typically specified as a function of the model’s DSS interest rate and output.

12

functions at hand, we can construct the transition equations (7) which, combined
with the measurement equations that map the observable variables to the appropriate
model concepts, form the state-space representation of the model. Since the likelihood
cannot be analytically characterized, it is typically evaluated by applying a filter to the
state-space representation in the evaluation step. Filters return the model’s one-step

ahead predictive densities over the available sample period, pΘ̄ yt |yt−1 , ..., y1 , Θ̃ ,
where yt denotes the vector of observable variables in period t. The product of the
model’s predictive densities in every period t ∈ 1, ..., T is the likelihood function:
T

 Y


LΘ̄ Y1:T |Θ̃ =
pΘ̄ yt |yt−1 , ..., y1 , Θ̃ .

(11)

t=1

Thus, for a given data set of T periods, Y1:T , a filter can be thought as a mapping
from the set of model parameters, Θ̃, to the value of the likelihood function.17 We
train a new NN – the NN particle filter – to accurately approximate this mapping.
The likelihood function of nonlinear models requires MC filters for evaluation.18
Compared to filters used with linear models, MC filters are both more time-consuming
and less accurate. These challenges are particularly pronounced when estimating
models with a highly dimensional state space such as nonlinear heterogeneous agent
models. As we will show, our NN particle filter significantly mitigates these shortcomings of MC filters.
The NN particle filter is trained through the following three steps. First, we
obtain several thousands of quasi-random draws from the parameter space. Second,
we execute the (standard) particle filter to derive the likelihood value at each of these
draws. It is noteworthy that for this step, we employ the trained NNs to approximate
17

The
makes it clear that while the likelihood function depends on all the parameters
n notation
o
Θ ∈ Θ̃, Θ̄ , we maximize this function only with respect to the subset Θ̃.
18
An example of MC filter is the particle filter (Fernández-Villaverde and Rubio-Ramı́rez, 2007).
This filter is often used by the economic literature to estimate the distribution of the state variables
or to evaluate the likelihood of nonlinear models; e.g. models with occasionally binding constraints
(Gust et al., 2017; Atkinson et al., 2020; Aruoba et al., 2021) or with (endogenous) multiple equilibria
(Aruoba et al., 2018; Rottner, 2023).

13

the policy functions and the DSS, which were described in Section 2.2. Consequently,
this step is not particularly time-consuming. Third, the NN particle filter is trained
to minimize the mean squared error between its predicted values and the likelihood
values evaluated in the second step.19
The NN particle filter undergoes training over thousands or even millions of optimization steps. Specifically, the training sample is divided into batches of size B.
Each batch is fed into the NN particle filter, which generates a vector of approximated
likelihoods. The loss is then calculated as the mean squared deviation with respect
to the likelihood values evaluated by the standard particle filter across batches. A
gradient-based optimizer adjusts the weights of the NN particle filter to minimize this
loss. This process continues until all points in the training sample have been used,
completing the first epoch. This procedure repeats for thousands of epochs. Over
epochs, the learning rate of the gradient descent method is progressively lowered,
allowing for broader exploration in earlier epochs and finer search in later epochs.
Dealing with overfitting. It is critical to prevent the NN particle filter from overfitting the training sample of drawn parameters. Overfitting occurs when NNs learn
too many details from the training sample, including noise generated by computational inaccuracies in the likelihood values approximated by an MC filter.
To mitigate the problem of overfitting, after training the NN particle filter, we
use a validation sample of quasi-randomly drawn parameter values. Importantly, we
do not optimize the weights of the NN when it is tested over the validation sample.
Therefore, the loss in the validation sample provides a helpful metric to determine
when to stop minimizing the loss criteria before the NN starts overfitting the training
sample. In Section 3.1, we show how to assess potential issues with overfitting of the
NN particle filter.
19

It is often convenient to work directly with the log-likelihood. This approach entails summing
the log of the one-step-ahead predictive densities across all the periods in the sample, T . It should
be noted, however, that using the log-likelihood introduces a slight bias due to Jensen’s inequality
(specified for the logarithm as E(ln(X)) ≤ ln E(X)) because our approach relies on averaging.

14

Bayesian estimation and forecasting. The NN approximation for the likelihood
explained above can be used to approximate the moments of the posterior distribution
for the parameters quite straightforwardly. Details on how to combine the likelihood
approximated with NNs and standard simulators of posterior draws, such as the
Random-Walk Metropolis-Hastings (RWMH) algorithm, are provided in Appendix
A. Our accompanying code relies on PyTorch as the machine learning framework.
”Real-time estimation and forecasting often entail the iterative estimation of
model parameters as new data becomes available. One way to do that in the context
of our methodology is to store the filtered states in the last period of the sample.
As the new data become available, we run the filter only over the new periods and
recompute the values of the likelihood to retrain the NN particle filter.
Another approach involves calculating the likelihood values using future data as
pseudo-state variables. We can train the NN that approximates the likelihood function by randomly drawing future data that have not yet been observed. As the data
are released, we can obtain the value of the likelihood in a fraction of a second from
the NN particle filter trained with simulated future data. The second approach could
be adjusted to accommodate data revisions for a few periods back.

2.4

Further discussion

The accuracy of estimation can be enhanced by adopting a sequential approach to
the proposed NN-based estimation method. First, parameter values can be drawn
from an uninformative unit hypercube to train the relevant NNs, which then provide
an approximation of the likelihood. Second, we use this approximated likelihood to
refine the bounds and the proposal distribution of the parameters in order to retrain
the NNs approximating the policy functions as well as the NN particle filter. This
iterative cycle could be repeated several times to improve accuracy.
Non-likelihood methods, such as the method of moments or impulse-response
matching, can be embedded in this framework. Instead of using the NN to approxi15

mate the likelihood, NNs are trained using a loss function defined with respect to the
moments to match or impulse response functions.

3

Validation of the method

We provide three proofs of concept to establish the validity of our estimation method.
Specifically, we assess our NN-based method i) by comparing the policy functions and
the likelihood approximated with NNs to the true solution of a linearized small-scale
New Keynesian DSGE model, which admits analytical solution; ii) by comparing the
policy functions approximated with NNs to those obtained with a state-of-the-art
(non-NN) global method when solving a RANK model with a recurrently binding
ZLB constraint; iii) by showing the ability of our methodology to recover the true
parameter values of a nonlinear HANK model with an occasionally binding ZLB
constraint using simulated data.

3.1

Proof of concept 1: a linearized small-scale DSGE model

We consider an off-the-shelf three-equation New Keynesian model with one shock
(TFP shock). The model is log-linearized around its unique steady-state equilibrium
and the resulting equations are shown in Appendix B.
3.1.1

The extended policy functions

We use our NN approach to approximate the extended policy functions of the output
gap and inflation. For reasons explained earlier, we truncate the parameter space,
as shown in Table 1. We use 500,000 iterations to train the NN by minimizing the
residual error for the Euler equation and the Phillips curve. These policy functions
are conditioned on the state variable and the parameters, leaving us with nine input.20
20

The NN contains five hidden layers with 256 neurons each. The activation function for the hidden
layers is continuously differentiable exponential linear units (CELU). The optimizer is AdamW.
The learning rate follows a cosine annealing scheduler starting from an initial rate of 1e − 4 and

16

Parameters
β Discount factor
σ Relative risk aversion
η Inverse Frisch elasticity
φ Price duration

LB
0.95
1
1
0.5

UB
0.99
3
4
0.9

Parameters
LB
θΠ Mon.pol. inflation response 1.25
θY Mon.pol. output response
0.0
ρA Persistence TFP shock
0.8
σA Std. dev. TFP shock
0.02

Table 1: Model parameters values – first proof of concept. The table shows the parameters
of the three-equation New Keynesian model. The lower bound (LB) and upper bound
(UB) show how we truncate the parameter space when training the NN to approximate
the model solution.

The batch size is set to 1, 000. We conduct five optimization steps to approximate the
policy functions. The convergence of the NN is shown in Figure 2, which underscores
a considerable degree of accuracy in approximating the two policy functions, with the
mean squared residual error averaged across the two loss components reaching values
around 10−10 .
In Figure 3, we show the extended policy function of the output gap as the structural parameters of the model vary. The extended policy function is evaluated at a
negative one standard deviation shock, and the unvaried parameters are fixed at the
middle value of their bounds, shown in Table 1. The comparison with the analytical
solution demonstrates that our NN is able to replicate the true solution extremely
well as the lines almost perfectly coincide. It is also noteworthy that NNs have the
ability to approximate the nonlinearities in the policy function well.Identical conclusions on the accuracy of the method can be drawn from a similar graph showing the
policy function of inflation (Appendix B).
3.1.2

Likelihood approximation and estimation

As a next step, we estimate the likelihood of this model with our NN approach.
We simulate inflation and the output gap from the linearized RANK model for 100
periods and use these simulated series as data. In the simulation, the parameters are
terminating at a rate of 1e − 6.

17

UB
2.5
0.5
0.95
0.1

Total loss during the training

10 4

Mean squared error

10 5
10 6
10 7
10 8
10 9
10 10

0

100000

200000

Iteration

300000

400000

500000

Figure 2: Convergence of the neural network solution. The figure shows the dynamics of
the mean squared error. The loss is calculated as a moving average over 1000 iterations.
The vertical axis has a logarithmic scale.

set to the middle of their bounds.21
We train the NN particle filter using a sample of likelihood values evaluated at
10,000 quasi-random parameter draws.22 These likelihood approximations are obtained by running the standard particle filter for each draw. When running the
particle filter, we choose a low number of particles (100 particles) to deliberately
add noise to the likelihood approximations with the objective of later illustrating the
problem of overfitting and how one can successfully deal with it. We will show that
even though the filter delivers only very noisy estimates of the likelihood, the NN
is able to correct this inaccuracy and interpolate the likelihood function by cutting
through the noise generated by the filter.
We divide our sample of 10,000 likelihood approximations into a training sample (80%) and a validation sample (20%). The NN is trained using the training
dataset across 20,000 epochs, wherein each epoch, the entire training dataset is processed. The training sample is divided into batches of 100. Each batch is passed
21

We add a small measurement error (5% of the variance of each observable variable) to avoid the
well-known problem of degeneracy of the likelihood function when using the particle filter.
22
This NN contains 4 hidden layers with 128 neurons each. The activation function for the hidden
layers are CELU. The optimizer is AdamW. The learning rate follows a cosine annealing scheduler
from an initial level of 2e − 4 and terminating at 1e − 7.

18

PF Xt conditioned on

PF Xt conditioned on

0.0095

0.010

0.0090

0.009
0.008

0.0085

0.007

0.0080

0.006

0.950 0.955 0.960 0.965 0.970 0.975 0.980 0.985 0.990

1.00

Discount factor

1.25

1.50

1.75

2.00

2.25

2.50

2.75

0.75

0.80

0.85

PF Xt conditioned on

Y

Relative risk aversion

PF Xt conditioned on

3.00

PF Xt conditioned on
0.010
0.009
0.008
0.007
0.006
0.005
0.004
0.003

0.010
0.009
0.008
0.007
0.006
0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

1.2

1.4

Inverse Frisch elasticity

1.6

1.8

2.0

0.50

0.55

0.60

PF Xt conditioned on
0.018
0.016
0.014
0.012
0.010
0.008
0.006

0.65

0.70

Price duration

0.0100
0.0095
0.0090
0.0085
0.0080
0.0075
1.4

1.6

1.8

2.0

MP inflation response

PF Xt conditioned on

2.2

2.4

0.008
0.006
0.004
0.86

0.88

0.90

Persistence shock A

0.92

0.2

0.3

0.94

0.014
0.012
0.010
0.008
0.006
0.004
0.002

0.4

MP output response Y

PF Xt conditioned on

0.010

0.84

0.1

A

0.012

0.82

0.0

0.5

A

Neural network
Analytical solution
0.02

0.03

0.04

0.05

0.06

0.07

0.08

Standard deviation shock A

0.09

Figure 3: Accuracy of the NN solution method. Comparison between the analytical policy
function for the output gap and the approximation based on NNs. The values of the
fixed parameters in each graph are set to the middle of their bounds shown in Table 1.

19

0.10

Total loss - Validation Sample

106

106

105

105
Mean squared error

Mean squared error

Total loss - Training Sample

104
103

104
103

102

102

101

101

0

5000

10000
Epoch

15000

20000

0

5000

10000
Epoch

15000

Figure 4: Training and validation convergence. The figure shows the total loss over the
training sample (left) and over the validation sample (right). An epoch is completed
when all the training or validation sample points are utilized. The vertical axis is
expressed in a logarithmic scale.

simultaneously to the optimization routine. An optimization step is completed when
the routine converges and returns the optimal NN weights. With 8,000 parameter
draws in our training sample, this optimization step is performed 80 times within
each epoch. In this application, we consider 20,000 epochs, resulting in a total of
1.6 million optimization steps across all epochs. The dynamics of total loss during
the training of the NN are depicted in Figure 4. The total loss converges to a value
whose magnitude reflects the accuracy of the particle filter, primarily dependent on
the number of particles used (in this case, 100 particles).
To assess potential concerns about overfitting of the NN particle filter, in the
right chart of Figure 4, we report the total loss when the likelihood is evaluated at
the parameters of the validation sample using the NN weights trained in every epoch
(x-axis). The proximity of errors across epochs in both samples, depicted on the
left and right charts, along with the consistent decrease in error over the validation
sample, suggests that the NN is not overfitting.
To more directly assess potential issues of overfitting, we compare likelihood approximations using different methods. In Figure 5, we plot how the likelihood –
20

20000

Log Likelihood

Log Likelihood log
1230
1220
1210
1200
1190
1180
1170
1160
1150
1.00

conditioned on

Neural Network
Particle Filter
True value
1.25

1.50

1.75

2.00

2.25

Relative risk aversion

2.50

2.75

3.00

Figure 5: Accuracy in likelihood evaluations: NN particle filter vs. standard particle
filter. The logarithm of the likelihood of the model as a function of the risk aversion
parameter σ. The value of the fixed parameters is set to the middle of their bounds.

approximated with two alternative methods – varies with respect to the relative risk
aversion, σ. The orange dots denote likelihood values evaluated with a standard particle filter using only 100 particles. As expected, this approximation is poor due to the
limited number of particles used to deliberately exaggerate potential overfitting issues
for instructional purposes. The solid blue line depicts the likelihood approximation
using the NN particle filter, also trained with 100 particles for consistency.
Interestingly, the NN approximation cuts through the cloud of likelihood points
generated by the particle filter, effectively filtering out the noise the filter introduces. Moreover, the parameter value at which the NN-approximated likelihood
peaks closely aligns with the true parameter value, as indicated by the vertical dotted line. Appendix B shows how the approximated likelihood varies with respect to
other parameters.

3.2

Proof of concept 2: A RANK model with the ZLB

We evaluate the effectiveness of our NN estimation strategy in recovering the true
data-generating process of a stylized nonlinear RANK model augmented with a ZLB
constraint, which is detailed in Appendix C.
21

Posterior
1.8

2000
2200
2400
2600
2800
3000
900

950 1000 1050
Rotemberg pricing

1100

0.2
0.3
0.4
0.65 0.70 0.75
MP output response Y
Persistence shock
2000
2200
2400
Neural network
2600
Standard global method
2800
True value
3000
0.0150 0.0175 0.0200 0.0225 0.0250
Std. dev. shock

0.80

2000
2200
2400
2600
2800
3000
0.60

Posterior

2000
2200
2400
2600
2800
3000
0.1

1.9 2.0 2.1 2.2
MP inflation response

Posterior

Posterior
Posterior

2000
2200
2400
2600
2800
3000

Figure 6: Posterior distribution. Comparison of the posterior distribution approximated with
the NN method (solid blue), and a state-of-the-art global method (dashed red). The
vertical black dash line denotes the true value of each parameter. The posterior distribution is evaluated at its median by varying one parameter at a time.

First, we simulate output growth, inflation, and the nominal interest rate for 500
periods from the model. Second, we estimate the model with our NN-based estimation
method and with an alternative method combining a state-of-the-art global solution
method (Richter et al., 2014) and the particle filter (Herbst and Schorfheide, 2015).
While this alternative method is too slow for estimating more complex nonlinear
models, it serves as a useful benchmark for evaluating the effectiveness of our method.

22

Our method demonstrates strong performance in recovering the parameters of the
true data-generating process. The posterior median closely aligns with the true value
and consistently falls within the 90% credible interval (shown in Appendix C). Moreover, the shape of the posterior closely resembles those obtained using the alternative
method, as shown in Figure 6. However, the alternative method is significantly slower
than our proposed NN method.

3.3

Proof of concept 3: A nonlinear HANK model

We now consider an off-the-shelf, stylized HANK model that features jointly idiosyncratic and aggregate risk. The economy consists of a continuum of households. The
households choose consumption Cti , labor Hti , and assets Bti to maximize their utility:

E0

X∞
t=0

β t exp(ζt )

"

1
1−σ



Cti
At

1−σ


−χ

1
1+η



#
(Hti )1+η ,

(12)

where ζt is an aggregate preference shock, which follows an AR(1) process ζt = ρζ ζt−1 +
ϵζt . At is the total factor productivity, which is nonstationary and introduces a trend
in consumption. The budget constraint in real terms can be written as:
Cti + Bti = τt



Wt
exp(sit )Hti
At

1−γτ
+

Rt−1 i
Bt−1 + Divti ,
Πt

(13)

where Divti = Divt exp(sit ) is the dividend in real terms paid out to household i
and scaled by the level of its labor productivity, Wt is real wage, Rt is the gross
nominal interest rate, and Πt is the gross inflation rate. The taxation is progressive
and governed by γτ and τt . The wage is divided by the productivity level to avoid a
fiscal drag in taxation. The agents individual labor productivity sit follows an AR(1)
process in logs: sit = ρs sit−1 + ϵs,i
t . The agents face a borrowing limit B such that
Bt ≥ B, in every period t.
Firms are monopolistically competitive and face nominal rigidities à la Rotemberg

23

with and φ denotes the price adjustment cost parameter. Total factor productivity,
At , follows a nonstationary process with trend growth: zt = ρz zt−1 + ϵzt . We denote
the average growth rate of TFP as ā.
Monetary policy sets the interest rate according to a standard rule that is subject
to a ZLB constraint. In symbols, Rt = max[1, Rtn ], where Rtn is the notional or shadow
interest rate that behaves as follows:
Rtn =


R

Πt
Π

θΠ 

Yt
At Y

θY
exp(mpt ),

(14)

where Yt stands for output in period t and R and Y denote the DSS equilibrium
values of the nominal interest rate and output, respectively. Π denotes the inflation
target, which is a parameter. The monetary shock follows an AR(1) process: mpt =
ρm mpt−1 + ϵm
t . All shocks are Gaussian, with standard deviations denoted by σl ,
l ∈ {s, ζ, z, m}. The full description of the model is provided in Appendix D.
We estimate this model in its nonlinear specification using simulated data generated from the same nonlinear model.23 The objective is to assess whether our solution
and estimation methods based on NNs allow us to retrieve the “true” parameter values used to generate the simulated data. The model is simulated for 144 periods by
fixing the values of the parameters that will not be estimated at the values shown in
the upper panel of Table 2 and the values of the parameters that will be estimated at
the values shown in the column labelled “True” in the lower panel of the table. The
observable variables are output growth, inflation, and nominal interest rate. In the
lower panel of Table 3, we show the prior distributions for the parameters to estimate.
Prior elicitation is presented in the next section when the model is estimated with
actual data. The prior mean is set to the true value of the parameters.
23

Little is known about the existence and uniqueness of rational expectations equilibria for nonlinear heterogeneous agent models. Acharya and Dogra (2020) derive the conditions for determinacy
for HANK models with linearly approximated aggregate dynamics. We always check that these
conditions are satisfied in our analysis. Additionally, highly persistent or highly volatile preference
shocks may lead to nonexistence of a stable equilibrium in DSGE models with a ZLB constraint
(Bianchi et al., 2021). We rule out these non-stationary equilibrium dynamics by appropriately
truncating the prior for these two parameters in all the applications where this can be an issue.

24

Calibrated Parameter Values
Parameters

Value

Target/Source

β
η
σ
ā
χ
γτ
D
Π
ρs
ρζ

0.9975
0.72
1
1.0033
0.74
0.18
1.0
1.00625
0.9
0.7

4% nominal interest rate
Chetty et al. (2011)
Log utility
Real GDP growth = 0.33% (quarterly)
Labor supply is approximately 1
Heathcote et al. (2017)
Wealth share=25% GDP (Kaplan et al., 2018)
Inflation target = 2.5% (annualized)
Share of borrowers = 34%
Frequency of ZLB = 15%

Discount factor
Inverse Frisch elasticity
Relative risk aversion
Average growth rate
Disutility labor
Tax progressivity
DSS government debt
Inflation target
Persistence labor prod.
Persistence pref. shock

Par.

True
Value

Type

Estimation
Prior
Lower
Mean Std
Bound

Upper
Bound

NN
Posterior
Median
5%

95%

Parameters affecting the DSS
100σs
B

5.00
−0.50

Trc.N
Trc.N

5.00
−0.50

1.000
0.010

2.50
−0.65

10.0
−0.35

4.28
−0.50

3.17
5.31
−0.54 −0.46

100
2.40
1.01
0.40
0.90
1.45
0.36
0.06

92
2.25
0.97
0.37
0.89
1.34
0.32
0.05

Other parameters
φ
θΠ
θY
ρz
ρm
100σζ
100σz
100σm

100
2.25
1.00
0.40
0.90
1.50
0.40
0.06

Trc.N
Trc.N
Trc.N
Trc.N
Trc.N
Trc.N
Trc.N
Trc.N

100
2.25
1.00
0.40
0.90
1.50
0.40
0.06

5.000
0.125
0.025
0.025
0.005
0.100
0.100
0.010

70
1.75
0.75
0.20
0.85
1.00
0.30
0.05

120
2.75
1.25
0.60
0.95
2.00
0.60
0.20

108
2.55
1.05
0.45
0.91
1.57
0.40
0.07

Table 2: Parameters of the nonlinear HANK model. The upper panel shows the calibrated
parameters for the nonlinear HANK model. The lower panel shows the true values used
for simulating the model in Section 3.3 as well as the prior and the posterior distributions.
Trc.N stands for truncated normal distribution.

The posterior moments of the estimated parameters are shown in the lower panel
of Table 2. The estimation includes 10 structural parameters. The posterior median
25

is very close to the true value, underscoring the ability of the method to retrieve the
true values of the parameters. In particular, the true value is mostly contained in the
90% credible interval for all parameters.
Note that the interest rate and the output targets (R and Y ) in the monetary
policy rule (14) are defined using their values at the DSS, which are affected by
parameters we want to estimate (σs and B). Therefore, as explained in Section 2,
we need to train a separate NN for the task. Overall, we set up NNs to perform
the following four tasks: (i ) characterization of the deterministic steady state (DSS)
equilibrium; (ii ) approximation of the aggregate policy functions; (iii ) approximation
of the individual policy functions; (iv ) approximation of the particle filter needed to
evaluate the likelihood.
To approximate the mapping from the parameters to the DSS equilibrium values,
we set the number of agents L to 100, implying a problem with 200 state variables –
the four aggregate shocks are shut down in the DSS – and 2 pseudo-state variables
(the parameters affecting the steady state – i.e., σs and B). The batch size is set to
100. The NN has four layers. We use 128 neurons in each layer and rely on CELU
and PReLU as activation functions.24
The next step is to solve the HANK model in its nonlinear specification with
idiosyncratic and aggregate risk. We train two NNs to approximate the aggregate
and idiosyncratic extended policy functions on the 204 states and 10 parameters.25
In Appendix E.2, we provide more information about how these two NNs are trained.
The NN trained to approximate the policy functions has five hidden layers. We use
128 neurons in each layer and rely on CELU and PReLU as activation functions.
24

To solve the system of equations in the DSS, it is necessary to also solve for the individual
agents’ policy functions. Therefore, we employ a temporary NN that maps agents’ individual states
and parameters to their labor decisions. The loss function is conditioned on the Euler equation,
adjusted for the borrowing limit and market clearing. Details are in Appendix E.1.
25
The NN for the individual policy functions is also conditional on the individual agent’s state
variables. We capture the Karush-Kuhn-Tucker conditions due to the borrowing limit using the
Fischer-Burmeister equation, as discussed in Appendix E. Alternatively, the constraints could be
directly embedded in the NN architecture, e.g., in Azinovic and Žemlička (2023).

26

Finally, we train the NN particle filter. We draw from the parameter space and
generate 15,000 likelihood values with a standard version of the particle filter. We
use 75% of these values to train the NN (training sample) and the remaining values
to validate the NN (validation sample). The NN features 64 nodes and four hidden
layers. We use SiLU (Sigmoid Linear Unit) as an activation function. The NN is
trained over 2,500 epochs with a batch size of 100.
After completing the training and validation of the NN, we can rapidly evaluate
the likelihood for a large number of parameter values. Consequently, we are now
able to execute the RWMH algorithm to approximate the moments of the posterior
distribution for the parameters. We generate 1 million parameter draws (after a
burn-in) to approximate the posterior distribution. We target an acceptance rate of
20% − 40%. Details on how we conduct the posterior simulation step via RWMH
are provided in Appendix A. It takes approximately three days with a GPU (Nvidia
Tesla V100 32GB) to estimate the HANK model.

4

Estimation with actual data

In this section, we show how to apply our methodology to estimate the nonlinear
HANK model introduced in Section 3.3 using actual data.

4.1

Data, calibrated parameters, and priors

To estimate the nonlinear HANK model, we use data on U.S. quarterly real per-capita
GDP growth, U.S. quarterly GDP deflator inflation rate, and the shadow interest rate
estimated by Wu and Xia (2016). The model’s counterpart of the shadow rate is the
notional rate, Rtn – representing the interest rate that would have been set by the
central bank in the absence of the ZLB constraint. All observables are in percent
and annualized. Our analysis covers a sample period starting from the first quarter
of 1990 and extending through the fourth quarter of 2019. To avoid degeneracy
27

problem in evaluating the likelihood, we introduce an i.i.d. measurement error for
each observable.
While it is feasible to include cross-sectional variables directly in our estimation
exercise, we prefer to introduce cross-section information via the prior distribution
for the volatility of the idiosyncratic income risk. Research on likelihood estimation
combining aggregate and cross-sectional data is still at an early stage, and we believe
it is not desirable to have too many new features in this application of our method
(e.g. Liu and Plagborg-Møller, 2023).
However, one might question if we can identify the idiosyncratic income risk, σs ,
from aggregate data without incorporating any information on the wealth distribution
in the estimation process. It is indeed possible because due to the occasionally binding ZLB constraint, the level of idiosyncratic income risk can significantly influence
macroeconomic volatility in the model. We illustrate these effects in Section 4.4.
We calibrate some parameters of the model, and their values are presented in the
upper panel of Table 2. We set the discount factor β = 0.9975 to be consistent with
a low interest rate environment characterizing our sample period. The inverse Frisch
elasticity η is based on Chetty et al. (2011). The labor disutility χ is set such that
labor supply is normalized to 1 in the steady state of a RANK model. The average
growth rate of the economy, ā, is set to match the average real GDP growth rate over
our sample period. Tax progressivity, γ τ , follows the estimated value of Heathcote
et al. (2017). We set the level of government debt equal to 25% of annual GDP in
line with the estimate of liquid wealth in Kaplan et al. (2018). The persistence of
the labor productivity ρs is set to 0.9 to target a share of borrowers around 1/3. The
persistence of the preference shock ρζ is set to 0.7; a value implying a ZLB frequency
broadly in line with the data. The variance of the measurement error is set to equal
5% of the in-sample variance of the observable variables as in Gust et al. (2017).
The priors distribution is shown in the lower panel of Table 2. The prior distributions are centered at values that are broadly consistent with the parameter values

28

of linearized RANK models estimated in the literature. Regarding the parameters
affecting the DSS, the prior mean of the borrowing limit is set to approximately 2
month labor income as in Fernández-Villaverde et al. (2023b), while the prior of idiosyncratic income volatility is set in line with the Gini coefficient on the US wealth
inequality measured by the World Inequality Database over a period ranging from
1990 to 2019.

4.2

Neural networks based estimation

Given that the model is identical to the one of Section 3.3, we can use the same NNs
trained to approximate the DSS and the extended policy functions. However, we must
train the NN particle filter again due to the different dataset. Details regarding the
specifications of the NNs and convergence statistics are provided in Appendix E.2.
After completing the training of these NNs, evaluating the likelihood of the nonlinear HANK model takes only seconds. Hence, we can conduct the RWMH exactly
as discussed in Section 3.3, aiming for an acceptance rate of 20% − 40%. Details on
how to perform Bayesian estimation of this model are provided in Appendix A.
The posterior moments are shown in Table 3. Bayesian updating is modest for
most parameters despite our prior standard deviation being fairly large and the average acceptance rate of the RWMH being around 27%. Since the prior mean for
these parameters was set to reflect typical estimates from linearized RANK models,
we interpret this finding as suggesting that heterogeneity and nonlinearities do not
lead to substantial revisions to the estimated values of those parameters.26
The Bayesian updating is somewhat stronger for the standard deviation of the
idiosyncratic income shock, σs . The posterior median is 2 percentage points above the
prior median. The interactions between heterogeneity and nonlinearities, particularly
the nonlinear ZLB constraint, play a critical role in identifying this parameter. As
26

Bayesian updating might be stronger if more observable variables (e.g., consumption or wages)
are used in estimation but this requires extending the HANK model, which is feasible but beyond
the scope of this methodological paper.

29

Estimation
Par.

Prior
Type

Mean

Std

NN
Lower
Bound

Upper
Bound

Posterior
Median
5%

95%

Parameters affecting the DSS
100σs
B

Trc.N
Trc.N

5.00
−0.50

1.000
0.010

2.50
−0.65

10.0
−0.35

7.04
−0.50

5.67
8.10
−0.54 −0.46

101
2.43
0.96
0.43
0.91
1.22
0.47
0.15

94
2.20
0.92
0.39
0.90
1.10
0.43
0.14

Other parameters
φ
θΠ
θY
ρz
ρm
100σζ
100σz
100σm

Trc.N
Trc.N
Trc.N
Trc.N
Trc.N
Trc.N
Trc.N
Trc.N

100
2.25
1.00
0.40
0.90
1.50
0.40
0.06

5.000
0.125
0.025
0.025
0.005
0.100
0.100
0.010

70
1.75
0.75
0.2
0.85
1.00
0.30
0.05

120
2.75
1.25
0.6
0.95
2.00
0.60
0.20

107
2.67
1.00
0.47
0.91
1.33
0.53
0.16

Table 3: Prior and Posterior distributions. Prior and posterior moments for the estimation
with real data. The prior type indicates the prior density function. Trc.N stands for
truncated normal distribution.

we will show, in our model, an increase in the level of idiosyncratic income risk (σs )
heightens the ZLB risk and frequency, leading to greater volatility in output and
inflation, which are observed in estimation.

4.3

How good is what we got?

The empirical fit of the model is quite promising given the stylized nature of the
HANK model we have estimated. In Table 4, we compare the second moment of the
observables in the estimated HANK model and in the data. The standard deviation
of output growth, inflation, and the nominal interest rate in the model are quite close
to the ones measured in the data.
30

Standard deviations

Autocorrelations

Avg. Gini coef.

Model

Data

Model

Data

Model

Data

0.6947
1.1511
2.561

0.5831
0.9045
2.7537

0.1355
0.8146
0.7219

0.4050
0.5456
0.9707

0.8793

0.8410

GDP
Inflation
FFR

GDP
Inflation
FFR

Wealth

Table 4: Moments comparison: model vs. data. The table reports the standard deviations (left panel) and the autocorrelation coefficients (middle panel) in the model and
in the U.S. data for the three observable variables: real GDP growth (GDP), GDP deflator growth (Inflation), and the federal funds rate (FFR). The right panel of the table
shows the average Gini coefficient in the model and in the U.S. data (World Inequality
Database). The model-implied moments are obtained by simulating the estimated model
for 1,000,000 periods and with parameters set at the posterior median. The empirical
moments are computed over the sample period used in estimation (1990:Q1-2019:Q4).

The match is somewhat unsatisfactory, when it comes to the serial correlation
of the three observables. This finding underscores the need for extensions of the
HANK model aimed at enhancing its endogenous persistence mechanism. Introducing
additional nominal and real frictions could be an effective strategy for improving the
empirical fit of the stylized nonlinear HANK model we have estimated.
Acharya et al. (2023) estimate a HANK model using likelihood methods and
find that its empirical performance is inferior to that of a state-of-the-art RANK
model. One potential reason for this subpar performance is the challenge of accurately
estimating certain parameters of the HANK model, particularly those affecting its
DSS, due to the high computational cost of recomputing it. Our NN estimation
method addresses this challenge by efficiently solving the steady state equilibrium of
HANK models, allowing the estimation of these parameters. In contrast to Acharya
et al. (2023), we estimate the fully nonlinear version of a HANK model, including the
ZLB constraint.
In Table 4, we also present the average Gini index of the wealth distribution in
our model, which we estimated without observing any cross-sectional data, alongside
the corresponding index measured by the World Inequality Database for the US over
the same sample period of our estimation. The two coefficients are quite close.
31

Extended PF for nominal rate R

Extended PF for output Y
1.008

4

% per annum

1.006

Level

s = 0.050
s = 0.070
s = 0.090

5

1.010

1.004
1.002
1.000

3
2
1

0.998

0

0.996
0.04

0.03

0.02

0.01

Preference shock

0.00

0.04

0.03

0.02

0.01

Preference shock

0.00

Figure 7: Aggregate policy functions of the nonlinear HANK model. The figure illustrates how equilibrium output (left) and nominal interest rate (right) vary as a function
of some realizations of the preference shock, ζt . The three colored lines denote the two
policy functions when the standard deviation of the idiosyncratic shock to households’
income, σs , is set to 0.050 (prior mean), 0.070 (posterior median), and 0.090. The
value of the other parameters is set to their posterior median.

4.4

Interactions between heterogeneity and nonlinearities

In this section, we emphasize the importance of preserving aggregate nonlinearity
when estimating a HANK model. Figure 7 illustrates how output (left chart) and
nominal interest rate (right chart) vary with preference shocks (x-axis) in the estimated model. The three lines represent different levels of volatility of idiosyncratic
shocks to income, with the red dashed line indicating the value consistent with the
posterior median of this parameter (our estimate). The blue solid line represents their
value at the prior mean for the volatility of idiosyncratic shocks. When the preference shock is negative, households save more, leading to a contraction in aggregate
demand. Consequently, output declines, explaining the upward slope of the aggregate
policy function on the left side of the plot.
For sufficiently negative realizations of preference shocks, the slope of the aggre-

32

gate policy functions for output becomes steeper. The kink in this function occurs at
the point where the negative preference shock is large enough to cause a contraction
in aggregate demand leading to the ZLB constraint becoming binding. The binding
ZLB constraint exacerbates the fall in aggregate demand by constraining monetary
policy, resulting in a more pronounced decline in output.
When the idiosyncratic risk is higher (moving from the blue solid line to the black
dashed-dotted line), output increases as households want to work more in response
to heightened income risk. The effects of a larger idiosyncratic risk on output are
less pronounced when the interest rate is constrained by the ZLB, indicated to the
left of the kink points in the left chart. In this scenario, an increase in idiosyncratic
risk prompts households to save more, thereby reducing the real interest rate and
prolonging the expected duration of the ZLB. This, in turn, has contractionary effects
on real activity. Consequently, the positive effects of a larger idiosyncratic risk on the
level of output are weaker when the economy is at the ZLB.
A higher idiosyncratic income risk increases the frequency of the ZLB constraint.
This effect is evident by observing the shift in the kink point of the policy function for
the interest rate to the right as idiosyncratic income risk rises (i.e., moving from the
solid blue line to the black dashed-dotted line on the right chart of Figure 7). This
shift in the kink indicates that it would require less severe (negative) realizations of
the preference shock to drive the nominal interest rate to the ZLB. Since smaller
realizations of the preference shocks are more likely to occur, the risk of encountering
the ZLB increases when idiosyncratic risk becomes larger.
Idiosyncratic risk and aggregate output volatility. The ZLB constraint interacts significantly with idiosyncratic income risk, amplifying the volatility of macroeconomic variables. In Figure 8, we illustrate that a heightened risk of encountering
the ZLB amplifies output volatility in our nonlinear HANK model. This amplification
is represented by the vertical distance between the blue solid line and the red dashed-

33

Standard Deviation of GDP

22

10

20

5

18

Frequency of Rtn 1 in %

% dev. from posterior median

15

0
5
10
15
20
25

Frequency of ZLB
Estimated model
Counterfactual: No ZLB
Posterior median

16
14
12
10
8
6

30
0.04

0.05

0.06

0.07

Idiosyncratic Risk s

4
0.04

0.08

0.05

0.06

0.07

Idiosyncratic Risk s

0.08

Figure 8: Volatility of output and ZLB frequency. Left chart: Volatility of output as a
function of the idiosyncratic risk in the estimated model (blue solid line) and in the
counterfactual case in which the ZLB is not enforced (red dashed-dotted line). The
reported volatility is expressed in percentage deviations from its posterior median.
Right chart: Frequency of ZLB episodes as a function of the idiosyncratic risk in the
estimated model (blue solid line). Frequency of episodes when the interest rate turns
negative in the counterfactual case in which the ZLB is not enforced (red dasheddotted line). In both charts, the vertical black dashed line marks the value of the
posterior median of the standard deviation of idiosyncratic shocks. The value of the
other parameters is set to their posterior median. The standard deviation of output
(in deviations from balanced growth) and the frequency of the ZLB and the frequency
of negative interest rate are computed by simulation (100,000 periods).

dotted line. The ZLB risk exacerbates output volatility because the effectiveness of
monetary policy in stabilizing the economy at the ZLB is diminished. The vertical
black line, representing the estimated volatility of idiosyncratic risk, shows that approximately 22 percentage points of GDP volatility are explained by the occasionally
binding ZLB constraint.
Importantly, the amplification effect of the ZLB on output volatility intensifies
with higher levels of idiosyncratic income risk. In Figure 8, we observe that the
vertical distance between the solid blue line and the red dashed-dotted line expands
as the level of idiosyncratic risk increases along the x-axis.
To delve into the rationale behind this finding, we examine how the frequency of

34

encountering the ZLB changes with the level of idiosyncratic risk. As shown by the
blue solid line on the right chart, as idiosyncratic risk increases, the ZLB becomes
binding more often. This occurs because higher idiosyncratic risk reduces the nominal
interest rate, leading to a heightened frequency of encountering the ZLB. With the
ZLB binding more frequently, recessions and deflation episodes become more severe,
ultimately amplifying macroeconomic volatility.
If we were to relax the ZLB constraint, the frequency of negative interest rates
would decrease by roughly 6 percentage points in the estimated model. This difference
is illustrated by the vertical distance between the solid blue line and the red dasheddotted line at the posterior median on the right chart.
The relationship between the frequency of negative interest rates and the level
of idiosyncratic risk remains positive – albeit somewhat less strong – even when the
ZLB constraint is not enforced, as indicated by the red dashed-dotted line on the
right chart. This is because higher idiosyncratic income risk prompts households
to increase precautionary savings, thereby depressing the nominal interest rate and
making it more likely for nominal interest rates to fall into the negative territory.
An important takeaway is that the parameter σs , which governs the level of idiosyncratic risk, can be identified using the volatility of output and inflation in nonlinear HANK models featuring the ZLB constraint. Therefore, observing any crosssectional variables in estimation is not strictly necessary to identify the volatility of
idiosyncratic income risk in our application.
The deflationary bias. Another advantage of preserving the nonlinear features of
a HANK model is the ability to assess the deflationary bias resulting from the occasionally binding ZLB constraint. As shown by Fernández-Villaverde et al. (2023b),
in a nonlinear HANK model, the deflationary bias is influenced by the volatility of
idiosyncratic income shocks. Our estimated nonlinear HANK model predicts a deflationary bias of around 30 basis points, measured as the difference between the DSS

35

inflation rate, Π, and the average inflation rate in the model – often termed stochastic
or risky steady-state inflation rate.
Our results should be interpreted as a conservative estimate of the deflationary
bias, given the limited degree of heterogeneity in our model – for example, agents
only trade one asset. HANK models with more sophisticated heterogeneity could
exhibit much more significant interactions, potentially introducing dynamics beyond
the scope of our simple HANK model. Exploring this avenue further could be an
interesting direction for future research.

5

Concluding remarks

We have introduced a novel method based on machine learning techniques to estimate nonlinear dynamic general equilibrium models with heterogeneous agents. Our
approach offers three significant advantages: i) it enables the estimation of models
featuring a large set of state variables, ii) it can capture nonlinear dynamics, such as
the ZLB constraint or borrowing limits, and their interactions with the decisions of
heterogeneous agents, iii) it allows the estimation of parameters affecting the model’s
steady-state equilibrium. Future applications of the proposed methodology include
nonlinear models with a very large set of state variables, such as models with multiple
sectors or multiple countries.
We applied our techniques to estimate the likelihood of a nonlinear HANK model
using US data. Standard macroeconomic data can identify the degree of idiosyncratic
risk, as this risk influences the frequency of ZLB episodes and, consequently, aggregate
volatility. Despite its relatively stylized nature, the estimated nonlinear HANK model
exhibits a very promising ability to match key moments in the data as well as the
average level of wealth inequality. Our exercise also highlights how the model can be
improved to achieve an even better empirical performance.

36

References
Acharya, S., Chen, W., Del Negro, M., Dogra, K., Gleich, A., Goyal, S., Matlin, E.,
Lee, D., Sarfati, R., Sengupta, S., 2023. Estimating HANK for central banks. FRB
of New York Staff Report 1071.
Acharya, S., Dogra, K., 2020. Understanding hank: Insights from a prank. Econometrica 88, 1113–1158.
Ahn, S., Kaplan, G., Moll, B., Winberry, T., Wolf, C., 2018. When inequality matters
for macro and macro matters for inequality. NBER Macroeconomics Annual 32,
1–75.
Algan, Y., Allais, O., Den Haan, W.J., 2008. Solving heterogeneous-agent models
with parameterized cross-sectional distributions. Journal of Economic Dynamics
and Control 32, 875–908.
Aruoba, B., Cuba-Borda, P., Higa-Flores, K., Schorfheide, F., Villalvazo, S., 2021.
Piecewise-linear approximations and filtering for dsge models with occasionallybinding constraints. Review of Economic Dynamics 41, 96–120.
Aruoba, B., Cuba-Borda, P., Schorfheide, F., 2018. Macroeconomic dynamics near
the zlb: A tale of two countries. The Review of Economic Studies 85, 87–118.
Atkinson, T., Richter, A.W., Throckmorton, N.A., 2020. The zero lower bound and
estimation accuracy. Journal of Monetary Economics 115, 249–264.
Auclert, A., 2019. Monetary Policy and the Redistribution Channel. American Economic Review 109, 2333–2367.
Auclert, A., Bardóczy, B., Rognlie, M., Straub, L., 2021. Using the sequence-space
jacobian to solve and estimate heterogeneous-agent models. Econometrica 89, 2375–
2408.
37

Auclert, A., Rognlie, M., Straub, L., 2020. Micro Jumps, Macro Humps: Monetary
Policy and Business Cycles in an Estimated HANK Model. NBER Working Papers
26647. National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Auclert, A., Rognlie, M., Straub, L., 2023. The Intertemporal Keynesian Cross.
Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming.
Azinovic, M., Gaegauf, L., Scheidegger, S., 2022. Deep equilibrium nets. International
Economic Review 63, 1471–1525.
Azinovic, M., Žemlička, J., 2023. Intergenerational Consequences of Rare Disasters.
Bayer, C., Born, B., Luetticke, R., 2024a. Shocks, frictions, and inequality in us
business cycles. American Economic Review 114, 1211–47.
Bayer, C., Luetticke, R., Pham-Dao, L., Tjaden, V., 2019. Precautionary savings,
illiquid assets, and the aggregate consequences of shocks to household income risk.
Econometrica 87, 255–290.
Bayer, C., Luetticke, R., Weiss, M., Winkelmann, Y., 2024b. An Endogenous Gridpoint Method for Distributional Dynamics. mimeo.
Bhandari, A., Bourany, T., Evans, D., Golosov, M., 2023. A Perturbational Approach
for Approximating Heterogeneous Agent Models. Working Paper 31744. National
Bureau of Economic Research.
Bianchi, F., Melosi, L., Rottner, M., 2021. Hitting the elusive inflation target. Journal
of Monetary Economics 124, 107–122.
Bilbiie, F.O., 2020. The new keynesian cross. Journal of Monetary Economics 114,
90–108.
Bilbiie, F.O., Primiceri, G., Tambalotti, A., 2023. Inequality and Business Cycles.
Working Paper 31729. National Bureau of Economic Research.
38

Boppart, T., Krusell, P., Mitman, K., 2018. Exploiting mit shocks in heterogeneousagent economies: the impulse response as a numerical derivative. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 89, 68–92.
Challe, E., Matheron, J., Ragot, X., Rubio-Ramirez, J.F., 2017. Precautionary saving
and aggregate demand. Quantitative Economics 8, 435–478.
Chetty, R., Guren, A., Manoli, D., Weber, A., 2011. Are micro and macro labor
supply elasticities consistent? a review of evidence on the intensive and extensive
margins. American Economic Review 101, 471–475.
Den Haan, W.J., Judd, K.L., Juillard, M., 2010. Computational suite of models with
heterogeneous agents: Incomplete markets and aggregate uncertainty. Journal of
Economic Dynamics and Control 34, 1–3.
Den Haan, W.J., Rendahl, P., Riegler, M., 2017. Unemployment (Fears) and Deflationary Spirals. Journal of the European Economic Association 16, 1281–1349.
Duarte, V., Duarte, D., Silva, D., 2024. Machine Learning for Continuous-Time
Finance. Working Paper 10909. CESifo.
Duarte, V., Fonseca, J., 2024. Global identification with gradient-based structural
estimation.
Ebrahimi Kahou, M., Fernández-Villaverde, J., Perla, J., Sood, A., 2021. Exploiting symmetry in high-dimensional dynamic programming. Working Paper 28981.
National Bureau of Economic Research.
Fernández-Villaverde, J., Hurtado, S., Nuño, G., 2023a. Financial frictions and the
wealth distribution. Econometrica 91, 869–901.
Fernández-Villaverde, J., Marbet, J., Nuño, G., Rachedi, O., 2023b. Inequality and
the Zero Lower Bound. Working Paper 31282. National Bureau of Economic Research.
39

Fernández-Villaverde, J., Nuño, G., Sorg-Langhans, G., Vogler, M., 2020. Solving
high-dimensional dynamic programming problems using deep learning.
Fernández-Villaverde, J., Rubio-Ramı́rez, J.F., 2007. Estimating Macroeconomic
Models: A Likelihood Approach. The Review of Economic Studies 74, 1059–1087.
Gornemann, N.M., Kuester, K., Nakajima, M., 2021. Doves for the Rich, Hawks for
the Poor? Distributional Consequences of Systematic Monetary Policy. Opportunity and Inclusive Growth Institute Working Papers 50. Federal Reserve Bank of
Minneapolis.
Gorodnichenko, Y., Maliar, L., Maliar, S., Naubert, C., 2021. Household Savings
and Monetary Policy under Individual and Aggregate Stochastic Volatility. CEPR
Discussion Papers 15614.
Guerrieri, V., Lorenzoni, G., 2017. Credit Crises, Precautionary Savings, and the
Liquidity Trap*. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 132, 1427–1467.
Gust, C., Herbst, E., López-Salido, D., Smith, M.E., 2017. The Empirical Implications
of the Interest-Rate Lower Bound. American Economic Review 107, 1971–2006.
Han, J., Yang, Y., E, W., 2021. DeepHAM: A Global Solution Method for Heterogeneous Agent Models with Aggregate Shocks.
Heathcote, J., Storesletten, K., Violante, G.L., 2017. Optimal tax progressivity: An
analytical framework. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 132, 1693–1754.
Herbst, E.P., Schorfheide, F., 2015. Bayesian estimation of DSGE models. Princeton
University Press.
Hornik, K., Stinchcombe, M., White, H., 1989. Multilayer feedforward networks are
universal approximators. Neural networks 2, 359–366.

40

Kaplan, G., Moll, B., Violante, G.L., 2018. Monetary policy according to hank.
American Economic Review 108, 697–743.
Kaplan, G., Violante, G.L., 2018. Microeconomic heterogeneity and macroeconomic
shocks. Journal of Economic Perspectives 32, 167–94.
Krusell, P., Smith, A., 1998. Income and wealth heterogeneity in the macroeconomy.
Journal of Political Economy 106, 867–896.
Lee, D., 2020. Quantitative Easing and Inequality. mimeo.
Lin, A., Peruffo, M., 2024. Aggregate Uncertainty, HANK, and the ZLB. Working
Paper Series 2911. European Central Bank.
Liu, L., Plagborg-Møller, M., 2023. Full-information estimation of heterogeneous
agent models using macro and micro data. Quantitative Economics 14, 1–35.
Luetticke, R., 2021. Transmission of monetary policy with heterogeneity in household
portfolios. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 13, 1–25.
Maliar, L., Maliar, S., 2020. Deep learning: Solving hanc and hank models in the
absence of krusell-smith aggregation.
Maliar, L., Maliar, S., Winant, P., 2021. Deep learning for solving dynamic economic
models. Journal of Monetary Economics 122, 76–101.
McKay, A., Nakamura, E., Steinsson, J., 2016. The power of forward guidance revisited. American Economic Review 106, 3133–58.
McKay, A., Reis, R., 2016. The role of automatic stabilizers in the u.s. business cycle.
Econometrica 84, 141–194.
Norets, A., 2012. Estimation of dynamic discrete choice models using artificial neural
network approximations. Econometric Reviews 31, 84–106.

41

Oh, H., Reis, R., 2012. Targeted transfers and the fiscal response to the great recession. Journal of Monetary Economics 59, S50–S64.
Ottonello, P., Winberry, T., 2020. Financial heterogeneity and the investment channel
of monetary policy. Econometrica 88, 2473–2502.
Ravn, M.O., Sterk, V., 2017. Job uncertainty and deep recessions. Journal of Monetary Economics 90, 125–141.
Ravn, M.O., Sterk, V., 2020. Macroeconomic Fluctuations with HANK & SAM: an
Analytical Approach. Journal of the European Economic Association 19, 1162–
1202.
Reiter, M., 2009. Solving heterogeneous-agent models by projection and perturbation.
Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 33, 649–665.
Richter, A.W., Throckmorton, N.A., Walker, T.B., 2014. Accuracy, speed and robustness of policy function iteration. Computational Economics 44, 445–476.
Rottner, M., 2023. Financial crises and shadow banks: A quantitative analysis.
Journal of Monetary Economics 139, 74–92.
Schaab, A., 2020. Micro and Macro Uncertainty. mimeo.
Scheidegger, S., Bilionis, I., 2019. Machine learning for high-dimensional dynamic
stochastic economies. Journal of Computational Science 33, 68–82.
Valaitis, V., Villa, A.T., 2024. A machine learning projection method for macrofinance models. Quantitative Economics 15, 145–173.
Winberry, T., 2021. Lumpy investment, business cycles, and stimulus policy. American Economic Review 111, 364–96.
Wu, J.C., Xia, F.D., 2016. Measuring the Macroeconomic Impact of Monetary Policy
at the Zero Lower Bound. Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 48, 253–291.
42

Online Appendix
A

Neural network based Bayesian estimation

The following Random Walk Metropolis-Hastings (RWMH) algorithm can be used
to estimate the parameters Θ̃, where we use the NN approximation of the likelihood
function. To integrate our NN approach for Bayesian estimation, we adapt the RWMH
algorithm of Atkinson et al. (2020).27 The approach is as follows:
1. Initialize the algorithm: Obtain a first proposal density from which the parameters: Θ̃ are drawn, as follows:
Draw from the prior distribution a candidate vector Θ̃N ew . Evaluate the
log-likelihood of the candidate vector using the trained NN for the particle


filter log LΘ̄ Y1:T |Θ̃N ew and combine it with the prior to obtain the logposterior log g(Y1:T |Θ̃N ew ).
Repeat these steps N init times and collect all draws as Θ̃init . Construct
an approximation for the covariance matrix by selecting draws where the
likelihood is above the 90% quantile, denoted by Θ̂, and subtract the mean
¯
Θ̈ = Θ̂ − Θ̂. Calculate the covariance matrix Σ = (Θ̈Θ̈′ )/(0.1N init ). Set Θ̆
to equal the mode, the draw associated with the highest likelihood.
2. Run the RWMH algorithm as burn-in. Repeat the steps below N Burn times:
Draw a new parameter vector Θ̃N ew from the proposal density to evaluate
the log-posterior. The proposal density is a multivariate normal distribution with mean vector Θ̆ and covariance matrix cΣ, where c is set to
achieve an acceptance rate between 20 and 40%.
27

See also Herbst and Schorfheide (2015) for more information on RWMH.

43

Evaluate the log-likelihood of the parameter vector using the trained


NN for the particle filter log LΘ̄ Y1:T |Θ̃N ew and combine it with the
prior to obtain the log-posterior log g(Y1:T |Θ̃N ew ). Accept the draw if
exp(log g(Y1:T |Θ̃N ew ) − log g(Y1:T |Θ̃)) is larger than the draw from a standard uniform distribution. If the draw is accepted, the mean of the proposal density is updated to Θ̆ = Θ̃N ew .
3. Use these N Burn draws to get an updated proposal density:
Keep only the last 75% of draws, denoted as Θ̂b . Calculate the deviations
¯
of each draw from the mean Θ̈b = Θ̂b − Θ̂b . Calculate the covariance matrix
Σb = (Θ̈b Θ̈b′ )/(0.75N Burn ). Calculate the mode Θ̆b and update the mean
of the proposal density Θ̆ = Θ̆b .
4. Run the RWMH algorithm to obtain the posterior:
Use the proposal density from above and repeat the steps below N f inal
times: Draw a new parameter vector Θ̃N ew from the proposal density to
evaluate the log-posterior. The proposal density is a multivariate normal
distribution with mean vector Θ̆ and covariance matrix cΣ, where c is again
tuned to have an acceptance rate that is between 20-40%. Evaluate the loglikelihood of the parameter vector using the trained NN for the particle


N
N ew
Y
|
Θ̃
and combine it with the prior to obtain the
filter log LN
1:T
Θ̄
log posterior log g(Y1:T |Θ̃N ew ). Accept the draw if exp(log g(Y1:T |Θ̃N ew ) −
log g(Y1:T |Θ̃)) is larger than the draw from a standard uniform distribution.
If the draw is accepted, the mean of the proposal density is updated to
Θ̆ = Θ̃N ew .
5. N f inal draws characterize the posterior distribution.

44

B

Linearized DSGE model

The model is a prototypical three-equation New Keynesian DSGE model with a TFP
shock. The model is log-linearized around its unique steady-state equilibrium, which
results in the following equations.


Ŷt = Et Ŷt+1 − σ −1 R̂t − Et Π̂t+1 ,

(15)

∗

Π̂t = κ(Ŷt − Ŷt ) + βEt Π̂t+1 ,

(16)

R̂t = ϕΠ Π̂t + ϕY X̂t ,

(17)

Ŷt∗ = ω Ât ,

(18)

Ât = ρA Ât−1 + σA ϵA
t ,

(19)

where we define ω = (1 + η)/(η + σ) as well as κ = (1 − ϕ)(1 − ϕβ)(σ + η)/ϕ. Output
is defined as Ŷt = (Yt − Y )/Y , inflation as Π̂t = Πt − Π, nominal rate as R̂t = Rt − R,
output in the flex price economy as Ŷt∗ = (Yt∗ −Y ∗ )/Y ∗ , TFP as Ât = (At −Y )/A, and
the output gap as X̂t = Ŷt − Ŷt∗ . The shock ϵA
t follows a standard normal distribution.
After some manipulations, the model equations can be written as:


X̂t = Et X̂t+1 − σ −1 ϕΠ Π̂t + ϕY X̂t − Et Π̂t+1 − R̂t∗ ,

(20)

Π̂t = κX̂t + βEt Π̂t+1 ,

(21)

∗
R̂t∗ = ρA R̂t−1
+ σ(ρA − 1)ωσA ϵA
t ,

(22)

where R̂t∗ is the natural rate of interest, which follows an exogenous process derived
from the TFP process.
We set up the NN as in section B.1 and train it by minimizing the residual error
constructed from equations (20) and (21). The law of motion of the exogenous state
variable, described in equation (22), is used for sampling.
The analytical solution for the output gap X̂t and inflation Π̂t , which can be

45

derived with the method of undetermined coefficients, is given as:
1 − βρA
R̂∗
(σ(1 − ρA ) + θY )(1 − βρA ) + κ(θΠ − ρA ) t
κ
R̂∗
Π̂t =
(σ(1 − ρA ) + θY )(1 − βρA ) + κ(θΠ − ρA ) t

X̂t =

(23)
(24)

The analytical solution underscores the idea of extended policy functions, which are
simultaneously conditioned on the parameters and state variables. The analytical
solution for the output gap and inflation depends on both the state variable R̂t∗ and
the parameters.

B.1

Mapping of the model to the general framework

We can map the linearized NK model in the general form of the solution method
outlined in section 2.2. The state variable, the structural shock, and the control
variables of the model are:
n o
St = R̂t∗ ,

and


νt = ϵA
,
t

and

n
o
ψt = X̂t , Π̂ .

(25)

The parameters of the model are divided into calibrated (θ̄), which is an empty set
in this application, and estimated ones (θ̃):
Θ̃ = {β, σ, η, ϕ, θΠ , θY , ρA , σA } .

(26)

The NN ψN N is trained to determine the output gap and inflation:
 


X̂
 t  = ψN N St , Θ̃|Θ̄ .
Π̂t

B.2

(27)

Neural network for inflation

Figure 9 shows the extended policy function for inflation that is conditioned on the
parameters.

46

PF t conditioned on

PF t conditioned on

0.0040

0.0040

0.0035

0.0035

0.0030

0.0030
0.0025

0.0025

0.0020

0.0020
0.950 0.955 0.960 0.965 0.970 0.975 0.980 0.985 0.990

1.00

Discount factor

1.25

1.50

2.50

2.75

0.75

0.80

0.85

PF t conditioned on

Y

PF t conditioned on
0.012
0.010
0.008
0.006
0.004
0.002
0.000

0.0035
0.0030
0.0025
0.0020
0.6

0.8

1.0

1.2

1.4

Inverse Frisch elasticity

1.6

1.8

2.0

0.50

0.55

PF t conditioned on
0.007

2.25

3.00

0.60

0.65

0.70

Price duration

0.0040

0.006

0.0035

0.005
0.004

0.0030

0.003

0.0025

0.002
0.001

2.00

PF t conditioned on

0.0040

0.4

1.75

Relative risk aversion

0.0020
1.4

1.6

1.8

2.0

MP inflation response

PF t conditioned on

0.007
0.006
0.005
0.004
0.003
0.002
0.001
0.000

2.2

2.4

0.0

A

0.1

0.2

0.3

PF t conditioned on

0.006

0.4

MP output response Y

0.5

A

0.005
0.004
0.003
0.002

Neural network
Analytical solution

0.001
0.82

0.84

0.86

0.88

0.90

Persistence shock A

0.92

0.94

0.02

0.03

0.04

0.05

0.06

0.07

0.08

Standard deviation shock A

0.09

0.10

Figure 9: Accuracy of the NN solution method. Comparison between the analytical policy
function for inflation and the approximation based on NNs. The values of the fixed
parameters in each graph are set to the middle of their bounds.

47

B.3

Neural network for likelihood approximation

Figure 10 shows the likelihood produced by the NN for varying different parameters
(blue line). The orange dots show the mapping between the parameter and the
likelihood directly coming from the particle filter.

C

Proof of concept 2: Comparison to a state-ofthe-art estimation method for nonlinear models

We now assess whether our NN estimation method can recover the true datagenerating process of a nonlinear model. Specifically, a nonlinear RANK model with a
ZLB. Furthermore, we compare the results with a state-of-the-art estimation method
for nonlinear macroeconomic models. This method involves solving the model using
global methods and then evaluating the likelihood using a particle filter for every
draw of the Metropolis-Hastings algorithm.

C.1

A nonlinear RANK model with the ZLB constraint

We use a small-scale RANK model with the ZLB as a nonlinear element.
Households. The economy consists of a representative household. The household
chooses consumption Ct , labor Ht and assets Bt to maximize their utility:
"
#
1−σ


X∞
C
1
t
β t exp(ζt )
−χ
(Ht )1+η ,
E0
t=0
1−σ
1+η
where ζt is an aggregate preference shock, which follows an AR(1) process ζt = ρζ ζt−1 +
ϵζt . Ct is aggregate consumption. The budget constraint in real terms is:
Ct + Bt = Wt Ht +

Rt−1
Bt−1 − Tt + Divt ,
Πt

48

(28)

1260
1240
1220
1200
1180
1160
0.95

Log Likelihood log

conditioned on

0.96

1260
1240
1220
1200
1180
1160
1140

0.97
0.98
0.99
Discount factor
Log Likelihood log conditioned on

Log Likelihood log

conditioned on

1.00 1.25 1.50 1.75 2.00 2.25 2.50 2.75 3.00
Relative risk aversion
Log Likelihood log conditioned on
1200
1100
1000
900
800
700

1260
1240
1220
1200
1180
1160
1140
0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 1.25 1.50 1.75 2.00
0.50 0.55 0.60 0.65 0.70 0.75 0.80 0.85
Inverse Frisch elasticity
Price duration
Log Likelihood log conditioned on
Log Likelihood log conditioned on Y
1260
1250
1240
1200
1220
1150
1200
1100
1180
1160
1050
1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
MP inflation response
MP output response Y
Log Likelihood log conditioned on A
Log Likelihood log conditioned on A
1250
1250
1200

1200

1150

1150

1100

1100
0.82 0.84 0.86 0.88 0.90 0.92 0.94
Persistence shock A

0.02

Neural Network
Random Draws
True value

0.04
0.06
0.08
Standard deviation shock A

0.10

Figure 10: Accuracy in likelihood evaluations: NN particle filter vs. standard particle
filter. The log-likelihood of the model as a function of different parameters. The
value of the fixed parameters is set to the middle of their bounds.

49

where Divt is the real dividend, Wt is real wage, Rt is the nominal interest rate, Πt
is the inflation rate and Tt is real lump sum tax. The first-order conditions are:

1 = βRt Et

exp(ζt+1 )
exp(ζt )



Ct
Ct+1

σ


1
,
Πt+1

(29)

χ(Ht )η = (Ct )−σ Wt .

(30)

Firms. The firm sector consists of a continuum of final goods producers and intermediate goods firms. The final goods retailers buy the intermediate goods and
transform them into a homogeneous final good using a CES production technology:
Z 1
Yt =

ϵ−1
(Ytj ) ϵ dj

ϵ
 ϵ−1

,

(31)

0

where Ytj is the output of intermediate goods firm j. The equilibrium price of the
final good and the demand for the intermediate goods of firm j can be expressed as:
Z 1
Pt =

1
 1−ϵ
j 1−ϵ
(Pt ) dj)
, and Ytj =

0

Ptj
Pt

!−ϵ
Yt .

(32)

Intermediate goods producers are monopolistically competitive. The firm j uses labor
Ntj as input to produce output Ytj with the following production technology:
Ytj = ANtj ,

(33)

where A is the total factor productivity. Labor is hired in competitive markets, where
the wage is determined as follows:
Wt = AM Ct .

(34)

The firm j sets the price of its goods to maximize its profit subject to the demand
curve for intermediate goods and Rotemberg adjustment costs for changing prices:
max
Ptj
j
Pt

Ptj
Pt

!−ϵ

Yt
− M Ct
Pt

Ptj
Pt

!−ϵ

φ
Yt −
2

50

!2
Ptj
− 1 Yt ,
j
ΠPt−1

(35)

where Π is the inflation target of the central bank. Imposing a symmetric equilibrium
and discounting future profits with the real interest rate, the New Keynesian Phillips
curve can be written as:
 
 



Πt
Πt
Πt+1
Πt+1
Πt+1 Yt+1
φ
−1
= (1 − ϵ) + ϵM Ct + φEt
−1
, (36)
Π
Π
Rt
Π
Π Yt
where Πt = Pt /Pt−1 . The Rotemberg adjustment costs are given back as a lump sum.
The real dividends paid out by the firm sector are Divt = Yt − Wt Nt .
Policy makers. The central bank sets the nominal interest Rt using a Taylor rule
that responds to inflation and output deviations from their targets Π and Y . The
ZLB restricts the nominal interest rate. The rule is given as follows:
"
 θΠ  θY #
Πt
Yt
Rt = max 1, R
.
Π
Y

(37)

The fiscal authority follows a passive policy rule, where it uses lump-sum taxes Tt
to keep their debts D on a constant path:
D=

C.2

Rt−1
D − Tt .
Πt

(38)

Mapping of the model to the general framework

We can map the RANK model in the general form of the outlined estimation procedure. The state variable, the structural shock, and the control variables are:
St = {ζt } ,

n o
and νt = ϵζt ,

and ψt = {Nt , Πt } .

(39)

The parameters of the model are divided in calibrated (θ̄) and estimated ones (θ̃):
Θ̄ = {β, σ, η, ϵ, χ} ,

(40)

Θ̃ = {θΠ , θY , φ, ρζ , σζ } .

(41)

51

The NN is trained to determine labor supply and inflation, which is sufficient to back
out other variables:
 


N
 t  = ψN N St , Θ̃|Θ̄ .
Πt

C.3

(42)

Data-generating process

The calibrated model is used as a data-generating process, providing a controlled environment for the estimation. The upper panel of Table 5 summarizes the calibration
of the model, with parameters chosen such that the model occasionally encounters the
ZLB. We use our developed approach to estimate the nonlinear model in a Bayesian
setup. We then compare the results to an estimation with a state-of-the-art (non-NN)
approach. The observables are the annualized quarterly output growth rate, annualized quarterly inflation rate, and the nominal interest rate, which are generated with
the calibrated model and cover a span of 500 periods.

C.4

Estimation

Priors. The prior distributions are truncated normal densities.28 The prior mean
corresponds to the true value, while the standard deviation σ is loose to avoid the
results being driven by the prior. The truncation ensures that the drawn parameters
lie inside the bounds that have been imposed while solving the NN. The lower panel
of Table 5 summarizes the priors.
Measurement equation. We base the analysis on the annualized quarterly output
growth rate, annualized quarterly inflation rate, and nominal interest rate. All data
28

The

probability

density function of the truncated normal is f (x; µ, σ, a, b, )
=
If the bounds are not symmetric, the parameter µ does not correspond to the mean of the truncated normal. For simplicity, we refer to µ as the mean independent
of the bounds.
ϕ((x−µ)/σ)
1
σ Φ((b−µ)/σ)−Φ((a−µ)/σ) .

52

True parameters for the data-generating process
Parameters
Value Parameters
β Discount factor
0.9975 θΠ
Mon. pol. inflation response
σ Relative risk aversion
1
θY
Mon. pol. output response
4 log(Π) Inflation target (annualized)
η Inverse Frisch elasticity
1
ϵ Price elasticity demand
11
Y
Output target
χ Disutility labor
0.91
ρζ
Persistence preference shock
ζ
Std. dev. preference shock
φ Rotemberg pricing
1000 100σ

Value
2
0.25
2
1
0.7
2

Estimation
Par.

θΠ
θY
φ
ρζ
σζ

Prior
Type

Mean

Trc.N
Trc.N
Trc.N
Trc.N
Trc.N

2.0
0.25
1000
0.7
0.02

Lower
Bound
0.1
1.5
0.05
0.05
50
700
0.05
0.5
0.0025
0.01
Std

Upper
Bound
2.5
0.5
1300
0.9
0.025

NN
Posterior
Median 5%
95%
2.04
1.92 2.15
0.250 0.240 0.260
985
921
1047
0.69
0.671 0.707
0.020 0.019 0.021

Alternative Approach
Posterior
Median 5%
95%
2.06
1.93 2.20
0.248 0.237 0.260
970
909
1033
0.688 0.670 0.707
0.020 0.019 0.021

Table 5: Parameters of the nonlinear RANK model. The upper panel shows the calibrated
parameters for the nonlinear RANK model. The lower panel shows the true values used
for simulating the model, the prior distributions as well as the posterior distributions.
The posterior is displayed for the NN-based estimation and an alternative (non-NN)
state-of-the-art approach. Trc.N stands for a truncated normal distribution.

are in percent. The measurement equation is given as:

 


t
400 YYt−1
−1
Output Growth

 


 


 =  400 (Πt − 1)  + ut ,
Inflation

 

Interest Rate
400 (Rt − 1)

(43)

where the measurement error follows a Gaussian distribution ut ∼ N (0, Σu ). The
variance of the measurement error for each time series is a fraction mE of its own
variance. We set mE = 0.1.
Training of the extended policy functions. The computationally most challenging step in the estimation is the first one, where we solve for the policy functions.
The NN approximates the labor and consumption policy and is conditioned on the
53

state variables and parameters to estimate. The network is trained by minimizing
the Euler equation and New Keynesian Phillips curve errors.
We use 100,000 iterations to train the NN.29 The batch size is set to 100, which can
be thought of as having 100 different parallel economies in each iteration. We draw
new parameters after every 100 iterations for the first 40,000 iterations and after 10
iterations during the rest of the training. After drawing new parameters, we simulate
the economy for 100 periods to get a new draw for the state variable for each batch.
For iterations where we don’t draw new parameters, we simulate for 20 periods. The
expectations are evaluated using 100 draws.30
The NN convergence during the training is shown in Figure 11, where the mean
squared error averaged across the functions we minimize is shown. The shaded area
indicates the periods 10,000 to 15,000 in which we introduce the ZLB. We slowly scale
the impact of the ZLB using the following functional form:
Rt = max[RtN , 1] + aZLB min[RtN − 1, 0]

(44)

The parameter aZLB is gradually lowered from 1 to 0 to move from the economy
without ZLB to the ZLB economy. The introduction of the ZLB complicates the
problem, as can be seen by the increase in the loss. At the end of the training, the
average mean squared error reaches a level of about 10−6 .
NN particle filter. We generate 15,000 likelihoods with the particle filter to train
the NN-based particle filter. We use the RWMH algorithm to easily obtain 50,000
draws from the posterior distribution after a burn-in.
29

The NN contains five hidden layers with 128 neurons each. The activation function for the
four initial hidden layers is the Sigmoid Linear Unit (SiLU), while the fifth layer is Leaky Rectified
Linear Unit (Leaky ReLU). The optimizer is AdamW. The learning rate follows a cosine annealing
scheduler starting from an initial rate of 1e − 3 and terminating at a rate of 1e − 7.
30
Our algorithm follows the general setup that we have described in Section 2.

54

Total loss during the training

Mean squared error

10 5

Total loss
Introduction of ZLB

10 6

10 7

0

20000

40000

Iteration

60000

80000

100000

Figure 11: Convergence of the NN solution. The figure shows the mean squared error
averaged across the two functions we minimize. The loss is calculated as a moving
average over 1000 iterations. The vertical axis has a logarithmic scale. The shaded
area indicates the period in which we introduce the ZLB.

Comparison. We compare the results to a state-of-the-art nonlinear estimation
approach that does not use machine learning techniques. The global solution method
is based on time iteration with piecewise linear policy functions as in Richter et al.
(2014), and the particle filter implementation follows Herbst and Schorfheide (2015).
When applying the alternative approach, we similarly use the nonlinear model as the
data-generating-process.31 However, this approach is much slower because we need to
resolve the model and run the particle filter for each draw. These limitations justify
our decision to use only 50,000 draws in the Metropolis-Hastings algorithm.
Results. The estimation results are summarized in Table 5. First, the NN approach
performs very well in recovering the true data-generating process. The posterior
median is close to the true value and always contained inside the 90% credible interval.
Furthermore, the posterior median and credible interval are very similar to those
obtained with the alternative method.
31

We use the same sequence of structural shocks, measurement error shocks, and the true parameter values to generate the data. However, the solution of the model comes either from our neural
network or from the standard global method.

55

D

HANK model

The model is a nonlinear HANK model that includes both idiosyncratic and aggregate
risk. It incorporates two key features: households facing idiosyncratic income risk
and a borrowing limit; and the ZLB on the nominal interest rate, which constrains
monetary policy. Additionally, the model includes demand, supply, and monetary
policy shocks.
Households. The economy consists of a continuum of households. The households
choose consumption Cti , labor Hti , and assets Bti to maximize their utility:
"
#
  i 1−σ


X∞
1
Ct
1
t
i 1+η
β exp(ζt )
E0
−χ
(Ht )
,
t=0
1−σ
At
1+η
where ζt is an aggregate preference shock, which follows an AR(1) process ζt = ρζ ζt−1 +
ϵζt . Ct is aggregate consumption and At is the total factor productivity. The budget
constraint in real terms can be written as:
Cti + Bti = τt



Wt
exp(sit )Hti
At

1−γτ
+

Rt−1 i
B + Divti ,
Πt t−1

(45)

where Divti = Divt exp(sit ) is the household specific real dividends, Wt is real wage, Rt
is the gross nominal interest rate, and Πt is the gross inflation rate. The taxation is
progressive, which is governed by γτ and τt determines the level of the post-tax income.
The wage is divided by the productivity level to avoid a fiscal drag in taxation. The
agents individual labor productivity sit is stochastic and follows an AR(1) process:
sit = ρs sit−1 + ϵs,i
t . The dividend payout is scaled with the level of the idiosyncratic
shock. The agents face a borrowing limit B, which implies:
Bt ≥ B.

(46)

56

The first-order conditions can be written as


exp(ζt+1 )
exp(ζt )

1 = βRt Et
 i −σ
Ct
1
i
λt =
,
At
At
"

 i 

λt+1
1
+ µit ,
λit
Πt+1

(47)
(48)

Wt
χ(Hti )η = (λit ) τt (1 − γτ ) exp(sit )
At


−γτ #
W
t
exp(sit ) Hti
,
At

(49)

where µit ≥ 0 is the normalized Lagrange multiplier on the individual borrowing limit
in equation (46).
Firms. The firm sector consists of a continuum of final goods producers and intermediate goods firms. The final goods retailers buy the intermediate goods and
transform them into the homogeneous final good using a CES production technology:
Z 1
Yt =

ϵ−1
(Ytj ) ϵ dj

ϵ
 ϵ−1

,

(50)

0

where Ytj is the output of intermediate goods firm j. The equilibrium price of the
final good and the demand for the intermediate goods of firm j can be expressed as:
Z 1
Pt =

(Ptj )1−ϵ dj

0

1
 1−ϵ

, Ytj =

Ptj
Pt

!−ϵ
Yt .

(51)

Intermediate goods producers are monopolistically competitive. The firm j uses
labor Ntj as input to produce output Ytj with the following production technology:
Ytj = At Ntj .

(52)

Total factor productivity At follows a nonstationary process:
At = at At−1 ,

(53)

57

where the trend growth rate follows an AR(1) process:
at = āexp(zt ),

(54)

zt = ρz zt−1 + ϵzt .

(55)

Labor is hired in competitive markets so that the wage is given as follows:
Wt = At M Ct .

(56)

The firm j sets the price of its goods to maximize its profit subject to the demand
curve for intermediate goods and Rotemberg adjustment costs for changing prices:
max
Ptj
j
Pt

Ptj
Pt

!−ϵ

Yt
− M Ct
Pt

Ptj
Pt

!−ϵ
Yt −

φ
2

!2

Ptj
−1
j
ΠPt−1

Yt ,

(57)

where Π is the inflation target of the central bank. Imposing a symmetric equilibrium
and discounting future profits with the real interest rate, the New Keynesian Phillips
curve can be written as:
 
 


 


Πt
Πt
Πt+1 Yt+1
λt+1
Πt+1
exp(ζt+1 )
φ
−1
−1
= (1−ϵ)+ϵM Ct +βφEt
,
Π
Π
exp(ζt )
λt
Π
Π Yt
(58)
where Πt = Pt /Pt−1 and λt = (Ct /At )−σ At −1 . The Rotemberg adjustment costs are
ex-post given back. The real dividends of the firm sector can then be written as
Divt = Yt − Wt Nt .

(59)

Policy makers. The central bank sets the nominal interest Rt using a Taylor rule
that responds to inflation and output deviations from their targets Π and Y . The
ZLB restricts the nominal interest rate. The rule is given as follows:
θY !
 θΠ 
Y
Π
t
t
exp(mpt ),
RtN = R
Π
At Y
58

(60)



Rt = max 1, RtN ,

(61)

where R and Y denote the deterministic steady state (DSS) values of the nominal
interest rate and output (in the detrended economy). While households face idiosyncratic shocks in the deterministic steady state, the economy does not face and the
agents do not expect aggregate shocks. Additionally, there is also a persistent monetary policy shock mpt to capture prolonged deviations from the rule:
mpt = ρm mpt−1 + ϵm
t .

(62)

The fiscal authority sets τt to keep their debts Dt on a constant path adjusted for
productivity gains:
Rt−1
Dt−1 − Tt ,
Πt
1−γτ

Z
Z

Wt
i
i
i
i
Tt =
Wt exp(st )Ht di − τt
exp(st )Ht
di.
At
Dt =

(63)
(64)

Market clearing. Market clearing for the labor market, bond market, and goods
market requires
Z
Nt =
Z
Dt =
Z
Yt =

D.1

Ntj dj =

Z

exp(sit )Hti di,

(65)

Bti di,

(66)

Cti di.

(67)

Equilibrium conditions

t
To have stationarity, we need to define the variables as follows X̃t = X
. The relevant
At

conditions can then be written as:

1−γτ R
t−1 i
˜ i,
C̃ti + B̃ti = τ̃t W̃t exp(sit )Hti
+
B̃t−1 + Div
t
Π t at

59

(68)

!σ
#

C̃ti
1
exp(ζt+1 )
+ µit ,
1 = βRt Et
i
exp(ζt )
Π
a
C̃t+1
t+1 t+1
−γτ 

 −σ 
i
i
i
i η
i
,
τ̃t (1 − γτ ) exp(st )W̃t exp(st )W̃t Ht
χ(Ht ) = C̃t
"

(69)
(70)

Ỹt = Nt ,

(71)

W̃t = M Ct ,

(72)

˜ t = Ỹt − W̃t Ỹt ,
Div
"
 

 
Πt
Πt
exp(ζt+1 )
−1
= (1 − ϵ) + ϵM Ct + βφEt
φ
Π
Π
exp(ζt )

(73)
C̃t+1
C̃t

!−σ 

#

Πt+1
Πt+1 Ỹt+1
−1
,
Π
Π Ỹt
(74)


RtN = R



Πt
Π

θΠ

Ỹt
Y

!θY 
 exp(ϵm
t ),



Rt = max 1, RtN ,

(76)

Rt−1
D̃ − T̃t ,
Π
a
t
t
Z 
Z


1−γτ
i
i
i
i
T̃t =
W̃t exp(st )Ht di − τ̃t W̃t exp(st )Ht
di
Z
Nt = exp(sit )Hti di,
Z
D = B̃ti di,
Z
Ỹt = C̃ti di.
D̃ =

E

(75)

(77)
(78)
(79)
(80)
(81)

NN-based solution algorithm for HANK

The algorithm uses the outlined NN approach to solve the HANK model described
in the previous section over the parameter space.
The state variables and shocks of the HANK model are given as:
n

oL 
i
i L
N
m
St =
B̃t−1
, st i=1 , Rt−1 , ζt , at , ϵt ,
i=1

60

(82)

n
o
s,i L
ζ z m
νt =
ϵt i=1 , ϵt , ϵt , ϵt .

(83)

The parameters of the model are divided into calibrated (θ̄) and estimated ones (θ̃).
For instance, in the case of our application with US data, this yields:
Θ̄ = {β, η, σ, ā, χ, γ τ , Π, D, ρs , ρζ } ,

(84)

Θ̃ = {σs , B, φ, θΠ , θY , ρz , ρm , σζ , σz , σm } .

(85)

We use two NNs to separate between individual and aggregate policy functions. The
I
individual NN ψN
N (·) solves for labor supply:


oL
n 
I
i
,
Hti = ψN N St , St , Θ̃|Θ̄

(86)

i=1

o
n
A
i
, sit . The NN for the aggregate policy functions ψN
where Sit = B̃t−1
N (·) determines
the wage and inflation:
 


Π
A
 t  = ψN
S
,
Θ̃|
Θ̄
.
t
N
W̃t

(87)

One challenge is that we must solve for the deterministic steady state values of
the nominal rate and output, as the Taylor rule depends on them. To focus on the
SS
algorithm for the moment, let’s assume that we have already trained a NN ψN
N (·)

that maps the parameter values to the deterministic steady state values:
 


R
SS
  = ψN
N Θ̃|Θ̄ .
Ỹ

(88)

The training of the above NN precedes the training of other NNs approximating the
individual and aggregate policy functions. The procedure is described in Section E.1
and adapts the below algorithm to a version of the model without aggregate risk (a
Bewley-Huggett-Aiyagari type model). The steps of the algorithm are as follows:
1. Set up the NNs to approximate the policy functions and initialize their weights:
61



i
I
,
S
,
Θ̃|
Θ̄
for the individual policy functions
S
The NN ψN
t
t
N

oL
n 
I
i
.
Hti = ψN N St , St , Θ̃|Θ̄

(89)

i=1



A
The NN ψN
S
,
Θ̃|
Θ̄
for the aggregate policy functions:
t
N



Πt
W̃t




A
 = ψN
S
,
Θ̃|
Θ̄
.
t
N

(90)

2. Solve for all time t variables for a given state vector of batch b. From the NN,
we have a current guess for the policy functions:
{Hti }Li=1 , Πt , W̃t ,

(91)

and the deterministic steady state values of R and Ỹ are given by equation (88).
The next step is to calculate the following (aggregate) variables:
at = āexp(zt ),

(92)
!

L

Nt =

1X i
H exp(sit ) ,
L i=1 t

(93)

Ỹt = Nt ,


Rt−1
− 1 D,
T̃t =
Π t at

PL 
1
i
i
W̃
exp(s
)H
t
t
t − T̃t
i=1
L
τ̃t = P 
1−γτ ,
L
1
i
i
i=1 W̃t exp(st )Ht
L
M C t = W̃t .

(94)
(95)

(96)

(97)

Then, we can calculate the nominal interest rate, where we impose the ZLB:
RtN = R



Πt
Π

θΠ

Ỹt
Ỹ

!θY
exp(ϵm
t ),

62

(98)



Rt = max 1, RtN .

(99)

After that, we calculate each household’s individual variables:

−γτ 1/σ L

i
i
i


 τ̃t (1 − γτ ) exp(st )W̃t exp(st )W̃t Ht
i
,
C̃t = 



χ(Hti )η













(100)

i=1

n

oL

i
i
˜
,
Div t = Ỹt − W̃t Nt exp(st )
i=1

L

1−γτ R
i
t−1 i
i
i
i
˜
ω̃t = τ̃t W̃t exp(st )Ht
,
+
B̃ + Div t
Πt at t−1
i=1
n
oL
i
i
i
B̃t = ω̃t − C̃t
.

(101)
(102)
(103)

i=1

Aggregate consumption is:
L

1X i
C̃t =
C̃ .
L i=1 t

(104)

We use a Monte Carlo approach to evaluate the expectations. We randomly
draw M sets of next period shocks to evaluate the expectations. We use the
antithetic variate method to increase the precision and reduce the number of
necessary draws. The antithetic variates technique creates to a given path
{ν1 , ν2 , ν3 , . . . , νM/2 } also its antithetic path {−ν1 , −ν2 , −ν3 , . . . , −νM/2 }. The
drawn shocks are given as:
n
oM
s,i,m L
ζ,m z,m m,m
ϵt+1 i=1 , ϵt+1 , ϵt+1 , ϵt+1

,

(105)

m=1

where the last superscript m indicates which shock draw the next period value
is associated with. Note that, with a slight abuse of notation, we also use the
superscript m, in the first position, to denote the monetary policy shock ϵm
t .
We then proceed to calculate the next period values of the stochastic state

63

variables for all M draws, that is:
n
oM
i,m
s,i,m L
i
st+1 = ρs st + ϵt+1 i=1
,
m=1
n
oM
m
ζt+1
= ρζ ζt + ϵζ,m
,
t+1
m=1
 m
M
zt+1 = ρz zt + ϵz,m
t+1 m=1 ,

(106)
(107)
(108)

which then gives us the state variables for all M shock draws.
We can then use the NNs for the individual and aggregate policy functions to
calculate the individual and aggregate control variables:
n



I
= ψN
N



oL M

m
Si,m
t+1 , St+1 , Θ̃|Θ̄

i,m
Ht+1

M

 Πm


A
m
 t+1  = ψN
N St+1 , Θ̃|Θ̄
 W̃ m

t+1

i=1

,

(109)

m=1

.

(110)

m=1

The next step is to calculate the following (aggregate) variables for the period
t + 1 for all M draws:
 m
M
m
at+1 = āexp(zt+1
) m=1 ,
!)M
(
L
X
1
m
,
H i,m exp(si,m
Nt+1
=
t+1 )
L i=1 t+1
m=1
n
oM
m
m
Ỹt+1
= Nt+1
,
m=1


 M
Rt
m
T̃t+1 =
−1 D
,
m
Πm
t+1 at+1
m=1

M

PL  m
i,m
i,m

1
m 


W̃
exp(s
)H
−
T̃
t+1
t+1
t+1
t+1
i=1
L
m
τ̃t+1 =
1−γτ
PL  m


i,m
i,m
1


W̃
exp(s
)H
t+1
t+1
t+1
i=1
L

(111)
(112)
(113)
(114)

.

(115)

m=1

We proceed with calculating for each household their individual variables in

64

period t + 1 for all M draws:

−γτ 1/σ L
i,m
i,m
i,m

m
m
m


 τ̃t+1 (1 − γτ ) exp(st+1 )W̃t+1 exp(st+1 )W̃t+1 Ht+1
i,m
C̃t+1 = 

i,m η



)
χ(Ht+1
















i=1

M







(116)
n


oL M
i,m
i,m
m
m
m
˜ t+1 = Ỹt+1 − W̃t+1 Nt+1 exp(st+1 )
Div
i=1

(

1−γτ
i,m
i,m
m
m
ω̃t+1
= τ̃t+1
W̃t+1
exp(si,m
)H
+
t+1
t+1

,

(117)

m=1

Rt
˜ i,m
B̃ti + Div
t+1
m
m
Πt+1 at+1

L )M
,
i=1

m=1

(118)
n
oL M
i,m
i,m
i,m
B̃t+1 = ω̃t+1 − C̃t+1
i=1

.

(119)

m=1

Aggregate consumption is given as:
(

1
m
C̃t+1
=

L
X

L i=1

)M
i,m
C̃t+1

.

(120)

m=1

We need to ensure that the borrowing constraints for households Bti ≥ B are
satisfied (see also equation (46)).32 It is convenient to define λ̄it as follows:
λ̄it = 1 − µit .

(121)

We calculate the multiplier for all agents L using their Euler equation:
(

M

1 X
λ̄it = βRt
M m=1

"

m
exp(ζt+1
)
exp(ζt )



C̃ti
i,m
C̃t+1

!σ

1
m
Πt+1 am
t+1

#)L
,

(122)

i=1

where we can now evaluate the expectations by taking the mean of the M draws.
Equipped with this object, we use the Fischer-Burmeister function ΨF B , a
smooth way of representing the Kuhn-Tucker conditions, to ensure that these
32

The Kuhn-Tucker conditions can be written as µit ≥ 0,

65





B̃ti − B ≥ 0, µit × B̃ti − B = 0.

m=1

,

conditions hold.33 This can be written as
FB

Ψ



1 − λ̄it , B̃ti − B



.

(123)

We can now calculate the error associated with the Fisher-Burmeister function:



2 L
1,i
FB
i
i
L = Ψ
1 − λ̄t , B̃t − B
,

(124)

i=1

where L1,i is the squared error of agent i.
We also calculate the squared error for the New Keynesian Phillips curve, the
resource constraint in period t and t + 1, and market clearing for the bond in
period t and t + 1:
 
 
Πt
Πt
L =
φ
−1
− (1 − ϵ) − ϵM Ct
Π
Π
"
!−σ 
#!2

 m
M
m
m
m
m
X
exp(ζ
)
C̃
Π
Ỹ
Π
1
t+1
t+1
t+1 t+1
t+1
−βφ
−1
,
M m=1
exp(ζt )
Π
Π Ỹt
C̃t
2

(125)
L

L3 =
L4 =

1X i
D−
B
L i=1 t
M
1 X

D−

!2
,

L
1X

M m=1
L i=1

2
L5 = Ỹt − C̃t ,

(126)
!2
i,m
Bt+1

,

(127)
(128)

M

2
1 X m
m
Ỹ − C̃t+1 .
L =
M m=1 t+1
6

(129)

3. Repeat step 2 for each element in a batch B, which gives the following loss
33

The Kuhn-Tucker conditions can be written as: e ≥ 0, f ≥p0, e×f = 0. The Fischer-Burmeister
function representing them is defined as: ΨF B (e, f ) = e + f − e2 + f 2 . The conditions are satisfied
when ΨF B (e, f ) = 0.

66

components:
n
oB
1,i,b L
2,b
3,b
4,b
5,b
6,b
L
,L ,L ,L ,L ,L
.
i=1

(130)

b=1

4. Define the loss function:
" L
#
B
X
X
1
α1i L1,i,b
+ α2 L2,b + α3 L3,b + α4 L4,b + α5 L5,b + α6 L6,b ,
ϕL =
1
B b=1 i=1
(131)
L

where {α1i }i=1 , α2 , α3 , α4 , α5 , α6 determine the weights for the different equations.
A
I
5. Optimize the parameters of the NNs ψN
N and ψN N to minimize the loss function

ϕL with a stochastic gradient decent based optimizer.
6. Steps 2 - 5 are repeated N int times to take several optimization steps. Redraw
the shock realization in period t + 1 for each internal optimization step.
7. Draw new parameters for each economy in the batch. This step is not required
at each iteration.
8. Simulate each economy for T sim periods using randomly drawn shocks. This
creates then the state vector for the next iteration of the optimizer.
9. Steps 2 - 8 are repeated N iter times until the NN converges on average to
sufficiently low loss.

E.1

Deterministic steady state and neural network

We need the mapping from the parameters to the deterministic steady state values of
the interest rate R and detrended output Ỹ , as these objects enter the Taylor rule. To
obtain this mapping, we solve for the deterministic steady state (DSS) of our HANK

67

model, in which agents face and experience idiosyncratic risk while aggregate risk is
absent.
The DSS NN solves for the deterministic steady state values:
 


R
SS
  = ψN
Θ̃|
Θ̄
.
N
Ỹ

(132)

To solve for this NN, we also need to solve for the individual policy functions of the
agents in the DSS.
n 

oL
i = ψ I,DSS Si , S, Θ̃|Θ̄
,
Ht
t
NN

(133)

i=1

where DSS enters the superscript of the NN for a clear distinction. Note that we let
the deterministic steady state values of the aggregate state variables still enter this
network. While this is unnecessary for solving for the DSS, it allows us to use this
trained NN as a starting point when we solve for the economy with aggregate risk.
1. Set up the NNs to approximate the policy functions and initialize their weights:


SS
The NN ψN
Θ̃|
Θ̄
for the steady state parameters:
N
 


R
SS
  = ψN
Θ̃|
Θ̄
.
N
Ỹ
I,DSS
The NN ψN
N





Sit , S, Θ̃|Θ̄

(134)

for the individual policy functions without

aggregate risk:
n 

oL
I,DSS
Sit , S, Θ̃|Θ̄
.
Hti = ψN N

(135)

i=1

2. Solve for all the current period individual variables. From the NN, we get a

68

current guess for the deterministic steady state values
 


R
SS
  = ψN
Θ̃|
Θ̄
,
N
Ỹ

(136)

and individual policy functions
{Hti }Li=1 .

(137)

Note that inflation is at target in the DSS, the wage equals its value in the DSS
without idiosyncratic risk, and the growth rate is at its mean. Thus, we know:
Π, W̃ , g.

(138)

The next step is to calculate the following variables:
!
L
1X i
Nt =
H exp(sit ) ,
L i=1 t
Ỹt = Nt ,


R
T̃ =
− 1 D,
Πg

PL 
1
i
i
)H
W̃
exp(s
t − T̃
t
i=1
L
τ̃t = P 
1−γτ ,
L
1
i
i
i=1 W̃ exp(st )Ht
L
M C = W̃ .

(139)
(140)
(141)

(142)

(143)

Note that we use a subscript t here to indicate variables calculated based on
individual shock realizations. We assume that L is sufficiently large so that
specific shock realizations and asset level of households do not affect the steady
state value.34 Once the network successfully approximates the DSS, aggregate
variables such as (detrended) output are the same in each period, e.g. Ỹt ≈ Ỹ , ∀t
34

Furthermore, the stochastic setup of the NN allows us to average over several hundred thousands
of draws as we consider in each iteration different draws for the batch B.

69

We pursue calculating each household’s individual variables:







n





C̃ti = 

χ(Hti )η

i
 τ̃t (1 − γτ ) exp(st )W̃


−γτ 1/σ L



,





(144)

i=1

˜ i=
Div
t







n

exp(sit )W̃ Hti

ω̃ti = τ̃t

Ỹt − W̃ Nt



oL
exp(sit )
,

W̃ exp(sit )Hti

B̃ti = ω̃ti − C̃ti

oL

(145)

i=1

1−γτ

R i
˜ i
B̃t−1 + Div
+
t
Πg

L
,

(146)

i=1

.

(147)

i=1

Aggregate consumption is given as:
L

1X i
C̃t =
C̃ .
L i=1 t

(148)

We use a Monte Carlo approach to evaluate the expectations, which requires
randomly drawing M sets of next period shocks for the households (we also use
the antithetic variate method here). The drawn shocks are given as:
n
oM
L
ϵs,i,m
t+1
i=1

,

(149)

m=1

where the superscript m indicates which shock draw the next period value is
associated with.
We then proceed to calculate the next period values of the stochastic state
variables for all M draws, that is:
oM
n
s,i,m L
i
si,m
=
ρ
s
+
ϵ
s t
t+1
t+1
i=1

.

m=1

This gives us the household state variables for all M shock draws.

70

(150)

We can then use the NN for the individual policy functions in the DSS:
n

i,m
Ht+1



I,DSS
= ψN
N



oL M

m
Si,m
t+1 , S , Θ̃|Θ̄

i=1

.

(151)

m=1

The next step is to calculate the following variables for the period t + 1 for all
M draws:
(

!)M
L
X
1
m
Nt+1
=
H i,m exp(si,m
,
t+1 )
L i=1 t+1
m=1
n
oM
m
m
Ỹt+1
= Nt+1
,
m=1
M


PL 
i,m
i,m


1


i=1 W̃ exp(st+1 )Ht+1 − T̃
L
m
τ̃t+1 = P 
1−γτ


L
i,m
i,m
1


W̃
exp(s
)H
t+1
t+1
i=1
L

(152)
(153)

.

(154)

m=1

We proceed to calculate each household’s individual variables for the period
t + 1 across all M draws:

−γτ 1/σ L
i,m
i,m
i,m

m

 τ̃t+1 (1 − γτ ) exp(st+1 )W̃ exp(st+1 )W̃ Ht+1

i,m
C̃t+1 = 

i,m η



χ(Ht+1
)
















i=1

M







m=1

(155)
n


oL M
i,m
i,m
m
m
˜
Div
t+1 = Ỹt+1 − W̃ Nt+1 exp(st+1 )
i=1

,

(156)

m=1

(
L )M

1−γτ
R
i,m
i,m
i,m
m
˜
W̃ exp(si,m
+
ω̃t+1
= τ̃t+1
B̃ i + Div
t+1 )Ht+1
t+1
Πg t
i=1

,

m=1

(157)
n
oL M
i,m
i,m
i,m
B̃t+1 = ω̃t+1 − C̃t+1
i=1

.

(158)

m=1

Aggregate consumption is given as:
(

1
m
C̃t+1
=

L
X

L i=1

)M
i,m
C̃t+1

.

(159)

m=1

71

,

We need to ensure that the borrowing constraint of the households Bti ≥ B is
satisfied. It is convenient to define λ̄it as follows:
λ̄it = 1 − µit .

(160)

We calculate the multiplier for all agents L using their Euler equation:
(

M

1 X
λ̄it = βR
M m=1

"

C̃ti
i,m
C̃t+1

!σ

1
Πg

#)L
,

(161)

i=1

where we can now evaluate the expectations by taking the mean over the M
draws.
Equipped with this object, we use the Fischer-Burmeister function ΨF B to enforce the Kuhn-Tucker conditions again. This can be written as:


ΨF B 1 − λ̄it , B̃ti − B .

(162)

We can now calculate the error associated with the Fischer-Burmeister function:

2 L


1,DSS,i
FB
i
i
,
L
= Ψ
1 − λ̄t , B̃t − B

(163)

i=1

where L1,DSS,i is the squared Euler error of agent i.
We also calculate the squared error for aggregate output, the resource constraint
in period t and t + 1, and market clearing for the bond in period t and t + 1:

2
L2,DSS = Ỹt − Ỹ ,
L

L3,DSS =

1X i
B
D−
L i=1 t

!2
,

(164)

M
L
1 X
1 X i,m
4,DSS
L
=
D−
B
M m=1
L i=1 t+1

2
5,DSS
L
= Ỹt − C̃t ,

72

!2
,

(165)
(166)

M

L6,DSS =

2
1 X m
m
.
Ỹt+1 − C̃t+1
M m=1

(167)

3. Repeat step 2 for each element in a batch B, which gives the following loss
components for the entire batch:
n
oB
L
L1,DSS,i,b i=1 , L2,DSS,b , L3,DSS,b , L4,DSS,b , L5,DSS,b , L6,DSS,b
.

(168)

b=1

4. Define the loss function:
" L
#
B
6
X
X i,DSS 1,DSS,i,b X
1
ϕL =
α
L1
+
αjDSS Lj,DSS,b ,
B b=1 i=1 1
j=2
where the weights for the equations are determined by

(169)
oL
n
α1i,DSS

and

i=1

αjDSS , ∀j = 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
I,DSS
SS
5. Optimize the parameters of the NNs ψN
to minimize the loss
N and ψN N

function ϕL with a stochastic gradient decent based optimizer.
6. Steps 2 - 5 are repeated N int times to take several optimization steps. Redraw
the shock realization in period t + 1 for each internal optimization step.
7. Draw new parameters for each economy in the batch. This step is not required
at each iteration.
8. Simulate each economy for T sim periods using randomly drawn shocks. This
creates the state vector for the next iteration of the optimizer.
9. Steps 2 - 8 are repeated N iter times until the NN converges on average to
sufficiently low loss.

73

SS
Total loss during the training - Steady State Neural Network NN

Mean squared error

101
10 1
10 3
10 5
10 7

0

2000

4000

Iteration

6000

8000

10000

Figure 12: Convergence of the NN solution for the DSS of the HANK model. The
figure shows the dynamics of the mean squared error, which is averaged across the
equations that we minimize, associated with the deterministic steady state values of
the nominal rate R and output Y . The vertical axis has a logarithmic scale.

E.2

Training of the neural networks and mean squared error

We are training our NN based model solution over the extended parameter space in
two steps. The details of the training process and the mean squared error are shown.
Training of the DSS neural network. The NN to approximate output and nominal rate in the DSS is trained for 10,000 iterations. We conduct 15 optimization steps
during each iteration step, including redrawing of the shocks, and use 100 Monte
Carlo draws. After each iteration, the economy is simulated for 20 periods. The
parameters are redrawn after every 40 iterations and are initialized with a longer
simulation of 200 periods. Note that this step also requires training a temporary
individual policy function, which provides the decision of households in the DSS. The
convergence of the NN is shown in Figure 12, where the mean squared error averaged
across the equations that we minimize is shown. At the end of the training, the NN
approximates the DSS with a very high accuracy.

74

Total loss during the training - PFs Neural Network NN

Mean squared error

10 2

Total loss
Introduction of aggregate risk
Introduction of the ZLB

10 3
10 4
10 5
10 6
0

5000

10000

15000

Iteration

20000

25000

30000

Figure 13: Convergence of the NN solution for the HANK model. The figure shows the
dynamics of the mean squared error during the training of the extended individual
and aggregate policy functions. The shaded areas indicate the periods in which we
introduce aggregate risk and the ZLB. The vertical axis has a logarithmic scale.

Training of extended policy functions. We use 30,000 iterations to jointly train
the NNs to approximate the extended individual and aggregate policy functions.
We conduct 15 optimization steps during each iteration step, including redrawing
of the shocks, and use 100 Monte Carlo draws. After each iteration, the economy
is simulated for 20 periods. The parameters are redrawn after every 40 iterations
and are initialized with a longer simulation of 200 period.35 Figure 13 shows that
the loss converges to an error in the magnitude of 10e-6. For better convergence,
we slowly introduce aggregate risk between periods 1000 and 2000 by scaling the
standard deviations of the aggregate shocks from a tiny value to the actual values.
Similarly, we introduce the ZLB between periods 5000 and 1000 by slowly scaling the
impact of the ZLB. In particular, we use the following functional form:
Rt = max[RtN , 1] + aZLB min[RtN − 1, 0].
35

(170)

During the first 1000 iterations, we have a shorter simulation horizon of 10 periods and 100
periods if parameters are redrawn.

75

The parameter aZLB is stepwise lowered from 1 to 0 to move from the economy
without ZLB to the ZLB economy.

76

Previous volumes in this series
1240
January 2024

The granular origins of inflation

Santiago Alvarez-Blaser, Raphael
Auer, Sarah M. Lein and Andrei A.
Levchenko

1239
January 2024

The use and disuse of fintech credit: when
buy now, pay later meets credit reporting

Yanfei Dong, Jiayin Hu, Yiping
Huang, Han Qiu and Yingguang
Zhang

1238
December 2024

Fiscal stimulus plans and households’
expectations

Fiorella De Fiore, Marco Jacopo
Lombardi and Albert Pierres Tejada

1237
December 2024

The macroeconomics of green transitions

Gregor Boehl, Flora Budianto and
Előd Takáts

1236
December 2024

Savings-and-credit contracts

Bernardus van Doornik, Armando
Gomes, David Schoenherr and Janis
Skrastins

1235
December 2024

Aggregate debt servicing and the limit on
private credit

Mathias Drehmann, Mikael Juselius
and Sarah Quincy

1234
December 2024

Targeted Inflation Targeting: Some Evidence
and Theory

Boris Hofmann, Cristina Manea and
Benoît Mojon

1233
December 2024

Fire Sales of Safe Assets

Gabor Pinter, Emil Siriwardane and
Danny Walker

1232
December 2024

Bond supply, yield drifts, and liquidity
provision before macroeconomic
announcements

Dong Lou, Gabor Pinter, Semih
Uslu and Danny Walker

1231
December 2024

Central bank communication and media
coverage

Fiorella De Fiore, Alexis Maurin,
Andrej Mijakovic and Damiano
Sandri

1230
December 2024

Whither inflation targeting as a global
monetary standard?

Claudio Borio

1229
November 2024

Through stormy seas: how fragile is liquidity
across asset classes and time?

Nihad Aliyev, Matteo Aquilina,
Khaladdin Rzayev and Sonya Zhu

1228
November 2024

Retail fast payment systems as a catalyst for
digital finance

Giulio Cornelli, Jon Frost, Jonathan
Warren, Clair Yang and Carolina
Velásquez

1227
November 2024

Decentralised dealers? Examining liquidity
provision in decentralised exchanges

Matteo Aquilina, Sean Foley,
Leonardo Gambacorta and William
Krekel

All volumes are available on our website www.bis.org.

